CHAPTER 25
DEEP LEARNING FOR NATURAL
LANGUAGE PROCESSING
In which deep neural networks perform a variety of language tasks, capturing the structure
of natural language as well as its ﬂuidity.
Chapter 24 explained the key elements of natural language, including grammar and semantics.
Systems based on parsing and semantic analysis have demonstrated success on many tasks,
but their performance is limited by the endless complexity of linguistic phenomena in real
text. Given the vast amount of text available in machine-readable form, it makes sense to
consider whether approaches based on data-driven machine learning can be more effective.
We explore this hypothesis using the tools provided by deep learning systems (Chapter 22).
We begin in Section 25.1 by showing how learning can be improved by representing
words as points in a high-dimensional space, rather than as atomic values. Section 25.2
covers the use of recurrent neural networks to capture meaning and long-distance context as
text is processed sequentially. Section 25.3 focuses primarily on machine translation, one of
the major successes of deep learning applied to NLP. Sections 25.4 and 25.5 cover models
that can be trained from large amounts of unlabeled text and then applied to speciﬁc tasks,
often achieving state-of-the-art performance. Finally, Section 25.6 takes stock of where we
are and how the ﬁeld may progress.
25.1 Word Embeddings
We would like a representation of words that does not require manual feature engineering, but
allows for generalization between related words—words that are related syntactically (“col-
orless” and “ideal” are both adjectives), semantically (“cat” and “kitten” are both felines),
topically (“sunny” and “sleet” are both weather terms), in terms of sentiment (“awesome”
has opposite sentiment to “cringeworthy”), or otherwise.
How should we encode a word into an input vector x for use in a neural network? As
explained in Section 22.2.1 (page 807), we could use a one-hot vector—that is, we encode
the ith word in the dictionary with a 1 bit in the ith input position and a 0 in all the other
positions. But such a representation would not capture the similarity between words.
Following the linguist John R. Firth’s (1957) maxim, “You shall know a word by the com-
pany it keeps,” we could represent each word with a vector of n-gram counts of all the phrases
that the word appears in. However, raw n-gram counts are cumbersome. With a 100,000-word
vocabulary, there are 1025 5-grams to keep track of (although vectors in this 1025-dimensional
space would be quite sparse—most of the counts would be zero). We would get better gen-


908
Chapter 25
Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing
eralization if we reduced this to a smaller-size vector, perhaps with just a few hundred di-
mensions. We call this smaller, dense vector a word embedding: a low-dimensional vector
Word embedding
representing a word. Word embeddings are learned automatically from the data. (We will see
later how this is done.) What are these learned word embeddings like? On the one hand, each
one is just a vector of numbers, where the individual dimensions and their numeric values do
not have discernible meanings:
“aardvark” =
[−0.7,+0.2,−3.2,...]
“abacus”
=
[+0.5,+0.9,−1.3,...]
···
“zyzzyva” = [−0.1,+0.8,−0.4,...].
On the other hand, the feature space has the property that similar words end up having similar
vectors. We can see that in Figure 25.1, where there are separate clusters for country, kinship,
transportation, and food words.
It turns out, for reasons we do not completely understand, that the word embedding vec-
tors have additional properties beyond mere proximity for similar words. For example, sup-
pose we look at the vectors A for Athens and B for Greece. For these words the vector
difference B−A seems to encode the country/capital relationship. Other pairs—France and
Paris, Russia and Moscow, Zambia and Lusaka—have essentially the same vector difference.
We can use this property to solve word analogy problems such as “Athens is to Greece
as Oslo is to [what]?” Writing C for the Oslo vector and D for the unknown, we hypothesize
that B −A=D −C, giving us D=C + (B −A). And when we compute this new vector D,
we ﬁnd that it is closer to “Norway” than to any other word. Figure 25.2 shows that this type
of vector arithmetic works for many relationships.
However, there is no guarantee that a particular word embedding algorithm run on a par-
ticular corpus will capture a particular semantic relationship. Word embeddings are popular
because they have proven to be a good representation for downstream language tasks (such
as question answering or translation or summarization), not because they are guaranteed to
answer analogy questions on their own.
Using word embedding vectors rather than one-hot encodings of words turns out to be
helpful for essentially all applications of deep learning to NLP tasks. Indeed, in many cases
it is possible to use generic pretrained vectors, obtained from any of several suppliers, for
one’s particular NLP task. At the time of writing, the commonly used vector dictionaries
include WORD2VEC, GloVe (Global Vectors), and FASTTEXT, which has embeddings for
157 languages. Using a pretrained model can save a great deal of time and effort. For more
on these resources, see Section 25.5.1.
It is also possible to train your own word vectors; this is usually done at the same time as
training a network for a particular task. Unlike generic pretrained embeddings, word embed-
dings produced for a speciﬁc task can be trained on a carefully selected corpus and will tend
to emphasize aspects of words that are useful for the task. Suppose, for example, that the
task is part-of-speech (POS) tagging (see Section 24.1.6). Recall that this involves predicting
the correct part of speech for each word in a sentence. Although this is a simple task, it is
nontrivial because many words can be tagged in multiple ways—for example, the word cut
can be a present-tense verb (transitive or intransitive), a past-tense verb, an inﬁnitive verb, a
past participle, an adjective, or a noun. If a nearby temporal adverb refers to the past, that


Section 25.1
Word Embeddings
909
france greece
germany
nephew
niece
aunt
uncle
car
bicycle
truck
apple
banana
pizza
Figure 25.1 Word embedding vectors computed by the GloVe algorithm trained on 6 billion
words of text. 100-dimensional word vectors are projected down onto two dimensions in this
visualization. Similar words appear near each other.
A
B
C
D=C+(B−A)
Relationship
Athens
Greece
Oslo
Norway
Capital
Astana
Kazakhstan
Harare
Zimbabwe
Capital
Angola
kwanza
Iran
rial
Currency
copper
Cu
gold
Au
Atomic Symbol
Microsoft
Windows
Google
Android
Operating System
New York
New York Times
Baltimore
Baltimore Sun
Newspaper
Berlusconi
Silvio
Obama
Barack
First name
Switzerland
Swiss
Cambodia
Cambodian
Nationality
Einstein
scientist
Picasso
painter
Occupation
brother
sister
grandson
granddaughter
Family Relation
Chicago
Illinois
Stockton
California
State
possibly
impossibly
ethical
unethical
Negative
mouse
mice
dollar
dollars
Plural
easy
easiest
lucky
luckiest
Superlative
walking
walked
swimming
swam
Past tense
Figure 25.2 A word embedding model can sometimes answer the question “A is to B as C
is to [what]?” with vector arithmetic: given the word embedding vectors for the words A, B,
and C, compute the vector D=C+(B−A) and look up the word that is closest to D. (The
answers in column D were computed automatically by the model. The descriptions in the
“Relationship” column were added by hand.) Adapted from Mikolov et al. (2013, 2014).


