916
Chapter 25
Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing
we have to process the entire source sentence before starting to generate the target. In other
words, the generation of each target word is conditional on the entire source sentence and on
all previously generated target words.
This gives text generation for MT a close connection to a standard RNN language model,
as described in Section 25.2. Certainly, if we had trained an RNN on English text, it would
be more likely to generate “big dog” than “dog big.” However, we don’t want to generate
just any random target language sentence; we want to generate a target language sentence
that corresponds to the source language sentence. The simplest way to do that is to use two
RNNs, one for the source and one for the target. We run the source RNN over the source
sentence and then use the ﬁnal hidden state from the source RNN as the initial hidden state
for the target RNN. This way, each target word is implicitly conditioned on both the entire
source sentence and the previous target words.
This neural network architecture is called a basic sequence-to-sequence model, an ex-
Sequence-to-
sequence
model
ample of which is shown in Figure 25.6. Sequence-to-sequence models are most commonly
used for machine translation, but can also be used for a number of other tasks, like automati-
cally generating a text caption from an image, or summarization: rewriting a long text into a
shorter one that maintains the same meaning.
Basic sequence-to-sequence models were a signiﬁcant breakthrough in NLP and MT
speciﬁcally. According to Wu et al. (2016b) the approach led to a 60% error reduction over
the previous MT methods. But these models suffer from three major shortcomings:
• Nearby context bias: whatever RNNs want to remember about the past, they have to ﬁt
into their hidden state. For example, let’s say an RNN is processing word (or timestep)
57 in a 70-word sequence. The hidden state will likely contain more information about
the word at timestep 56 than the word at timestep 5, because each time the hidden vector
is updated it has to replace some amount of existing information with new information.
This behavior is part of the intentional design of the model, and often makes sense for
NLP, since nearby context is typically more important. However, far-away context can
be crucial as well, and can get lost in an RNN model; even LSTMs have difﬁculty with
this task.
• Fixed context size limit: In an RNN translation model the entire source sentence is
compressed into a single ﬁxed-dimensional hidden state vector. An LSTM used in
a state-of-the-art NLP model typically has around 1024 dimensions, and if we have to
represent, say, a 64-word sentence in 1024 dimensions, this only gives us 16 dimensions
per word—not enough for complex sentences. Increasing the hidden state vector size
can lead to slow training and overﬁtting.
• Slower sequential processing: As discussed in Section 22.3, neural networks realize
considerable efﬁciency gains by processing the training data in batches so as to take
advantage of efﬁcient hardware support for matrix arithmetic. RNNs, on the other hand,
seem to be constrained to operate on the training data one word at a time.
25.3.1 Attention
What if the target RNN were conditioned on all of the hidden vectors from the source RNN,
rather than just the last one? This would mitigate the shortcomings of nearby context bias and
ﬁxed context size limits, allowing the model to access any previous word equally well. One
way to achieve this access is to concatenate all of the source RNN hidden vectors. However,


Section 25.3
Sequence-to-Sequence Models
917
(a)
The
front
door
is
red
<start>
La
La
puerta
Source
LSTM
Source
LSTM
Source
LSTM
Source
LSTM
Source
LSTM
Target
Attentional
LSTM
Target
Attentional
LSTM
…
La
puerta
de
entrada
es
roja
The
front
door
is
red
(b)
Figure 25.7 (a) Attentional sequence-to-sequence model for English-to-Spanish translation.
The dashed lines represent attention. (b) Example of attention probability matrix for a bilin-
gual sentence pair, with darker boxes representing higher values of aij. The attention proba-
bilities sum to one over each column.
this would cause a huge increase in the number of weights, with a concomitant increase in
computation time and potentially overﬁtting as well. Instead, we can take advantage of the
fact that when the target RNN is generating the target one word at a time, it is likely that only
a small part of the source is actually relevant to each target word.
Crucially, the target RNN must pay attention to different parts of the source for every
word. Suppose a network is trained to translate English to Spanish. It is given the words
“The front door is red” followed by an end of sentence marker, which means it is time to start
outputting Spanish words. So ideally it should ﬁrst pay attention to “The” and generate “La,”
then pay attention to “door” and output “puerta,” and so on.
We can formalize this concept with a neural network component called attention, which
Attention
can be used to create a “context-based summarization” of the source sentence into a ﬁxed-
dimensional representation. The context vector ci contains the most relevant information
for generating the next target word, and will be used as an additional input to the target
RNN. A sequence-to-sequence model that uses attention is called an attentional sequence-
to-sequence model. If the standard target RNN is written as:
Attentional
sequence-to-
sequence
model
hi = RNN(hi−1,xi),
the target RNN for attentional sequence-to-sequence models can be written as:
hi = RNN(hi−1,[xi;ci])
where [xi;ci] is the concatenation of the input and context vectors, ci, deﬁned as:
ri j = hi−1 ·sj
ai j = erij/(∑
k
erik)
ci = ∑
j
aij ·sj


918
Chapter 25
Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing
where hi−1 is the target RNN vector that is going to be used for predicting the word at timestep
i, and sj is the output of the source RNN vector for the source word (or timestep) j. Both hi−1
and sj are d-dimensional vectors, where d is the hidden size. The value of ri j is therefore the
raw “attention score” between the current target state and the source word j. These scores are
then normalized into a probability ai j using a softmax over all source words. Finally, these
probabilities are used to generate a weighted average of the source RNN vectors, ci (another
d-dimensional vector).
An example of an attentional sequence-to-sequence model is given in Figure 25.7 (a).
There are a few important details to understand. First, the attention component itself has no
learned weights and supports variable-length sequences on both the source and target side.
Second, like most of the other neural network modeling techniques we’ve learned about,
attention is entirely latent. The programmer does not dictate what information gets used
when; the model learns what to use. Attention can also be combined with multilayer RNNs.
Typically attention is applied at each layer in that case.
The probabilistic softmax formulation for attention serves three purposes. First, it makes
attention differentiable, which is necessary for it to be used with back-propagation. Even
though attention itself has no learned weights, the gradients still ﬂow back through attention
to the source and target RNNs. Second, the probabilistic formulation allows the model to
capture certain types of long-distance contextualization that may have not been captured by
the source RNN, since attention can consider the entire source sequence at once, and learn to
keep what is important and ignore the rest. Third, probabilistic attention allows the network
to represent uncertainty—if the network does not know exactly what source word to translate
next, it can distribute the attention probabilities over several options, and then actually choose
the word using the target RNN.
Unlike most components of neural networks, attention probabilities are often interpretable
by humans and intuitively meaningful. For example, in the case of machine translation, the
attention probabilities often correspond to the word-to-word alignments that a human would
generate. This is shown in Figure 25.7(b).
Sequence-to-sequence models are a natural for machine translation, but almost any nat-
ural language task can be encoded as a sequence-to-sequence problem.
For example, a
question-answering system can be trained on input consisting of a question followed by a
delimiter followed by the answer.
25.3.2 Decoding
At training time, a sequence-to-sequence model attempts to maximize the probability of each
word in the target training sentence, conditioned on the source and all of the previous target
words. Once training is complete, we are given a source sentence, and our goal is to generate
the corresponding target sentence. As shown in Figure 25.7, we can generate the target one
word at a time, and then feed back in the word that we generated at the next timestep. This
procedure is called decoding.
Decoding
The simplest form of decoding is to select the highest probability word at each timestep
and then feed this word as input to the next timestep. This is called greedy decoding because
Greedy decoding
after each target word is generated, the system has fully committed to the hypothesis that it
has produced so far. The problem is that the goal of decoding is to maximize the probability
of the entire target sequence, which greedy decoding may not achieve. For example, consider


