Bibliographical and Historical Notes
931
ninth place) that a new version, SUPERGLUE (Wang et al., 2019), was introduced with tasks
that are designed to be harder for computers, but still easy for humans.
At the end of 2019, T5 was the overall leader with a score of 89.3, just half a point
below the human baseline of 89.8. On three of the ten tasks, T5 actually exceeds human
performance: yes/no question answering (such as “Is France the same time zone as the UK?”)
and two reading comprehension tasks involving answering questions after reading either a
paragraph or a news article.
Machine translation is a major application of language models. In 1933, Petr Troyanskii
received a patent for a “translating machine,” but there were no computers available to imple-
ment his ideas. In 1947, Warren Weaver, drawing on work in cryptography and information
theory, wrote to Norbert Wiener: “When I look at an article in Russian, I say: ‘This is really
written in English, but it has been coded in strange symbols. I will now proceed to decode.”’
The community proceeded to try to decode in this way, but they didn’t have sufﬁcient data
and computing resources to make the approach practical.
In the 1970s that began to change, and the SYSTRAN system (Toma, 1977) was the ﬁrst
commercially successful machine translation system. SYSTRAN relied on lexical and gram-
matical rules hand-crafted by linguists as well as on training data. In the 1980s, the com-
munity embraced purely statistical models based on frequency of words and phrases (Brown
et al., 1988; Koehn, 2009). Once training sets reached billions or trillions of tokens (Brants
et al., 2007), this yielded systems that produced comprehensible but not ﬂuent results (Och
and Ney, 2004; Zollmann et al., 2008). Och and Ney (2002) show how discriminative training
led to an advance in machine translation in the early 2000s.
Sutskever et al. (2015) ﬁrst showed that it is possible to learn an end-to-end sequence-
to-sequence neural model for machine translation. Bahdanau et al. (2015) demonstrated the
advantage of a model that jointly learns to align sentences in the source and target language
and to translate between the languages. Vaswani et al. (2018) showed that neural machine
translation systems can further be improved by replacing LSTMs with transformer archi-
tectures, which use the attention mechanism to capture context. These neural translation
systems quickly overtook statistical phrase-based methods, and the transformer architecture
soon spread to other NLP tasks.
Research on question answering was facilitated by the creation of SQUAD, the ﬁrst
large-scale data set for training and testing question-answering systems (Rajpurkar et al.,
2016). Since then, a number of deep learning models have been developed for this task (Seo
et al., 2017; Keskar et al., 2019). The ARISTO system (Clark et al., 2019) uses deep learn-
ing in conjunction with an ensemble of other tactics. Since 2018, the majority of question-
answering models use pretrained language representations, leading to a noticeable improve-
ment over earlier systems.
Natural language inference is the task of judging whether a hypothesis (dogs need to
eat) is entailed by a premise (all animals need to eat). This task was popularized by the
PASCAL Challenge (Dagan et al., 2005). Large-scale data sets are now available (Bowman
et al., 2015; Williams et al., 2018). Systems based on pretrained models such as ELMO and
BERT currently provide the best performance on language inference tasks.
The Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL) focuses on
learning for NLP. All the conferences and journals mentioned in Chapter 24 now include
papers on deep learning, which now has a dominant position in the ﬁeld of NLP.


