922
Chapter 25
Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing
vectors—one for each word position. The input to the ﬁrst transformer layer is the sum of the
word embedding at position t plus the positional embedding corresponding to position t.
Figure 25.10 illustrates the transformer architecture for POS tagging, applied to the same
sentence used in Figure 25.3. At the bottom, the word embedding and the positional embed-
dings are summed to form the input for a three-layer transformer. The transformer produces
one vector per word, as in RNN-based POS tagging. Each vector is fed into a ﬁnal output
layer and softmax layer to produce a probability distribution over the tags.
In this section, we have actually only told half the transformer story: the model we de-
scribed here is called the transformer encoder. It is useful for text classiﬁcation tasks. The
Transformer encoder
full transformer architecture was originally designed as a sequence-to-sequence model for
machine translation. Therefore, in addition to the encoder, it also includes a transformer
decoder. The encoder and decoder are nearly identical, except that the decoder uses a ver-
Transformer decoder
sion of self-attention where each word can only attend to the words before it, since text is
generated left-to-right. The decoder also has a second attention module in each transformer
layer that attends to the output of the transformer encoder.
25.5 Pretraining and Transfer Learning
Getting enough data to build a robust model can be a challenge. In computer vision (see
Chapter 27), that challenge was addressed by assembling large collections of images (such as
ImageNet) and hand-labeling them.
For natural language, it is more common to work with text that is unlabeled. The dif-
ference is in part due to the difﬁculty of labeling: an unskilled worker can easily label an
image as “cat” or “sunset,” but it requires extensive training to annotate a sentence with part-
of-speech tags or parse trees. The difference is also due to the abundance of text: the Internet
adds over 100 billion words of text each day, including digitized books, curated resources
such as Wikipedia, and uncurated social media posts.
Projects such as Common Crawl provide easy access to this data. Any running text can
be used to build n-gram or word embedding models, and some text comes with structure that
can be helpful for a variety of tasks—for example, there are many FAQ sites with question-
answer pairs that can be used to train a question-answering system. Similarly, many Web
sites publish side-by-side translations of texts, which can be used to train machine translation
systems. Some text even comes with labels of a sort, such as review sites where users annotate
their text reviews with a 5-star rating system.
We would prefer not to have to go to the trouble of creating a new data set every time
we want a new NLP model. In this section, we introduce the idea of pretraining: a form
Pretraining
of transfer learning (see Section 22.7.2) in which we use a large amount of shared general-
domain language data to train an initial version of an NLP model. From there, we can use a
smaller amount of domain-speciﬁc data (perhaps including some labeled data) to reﬁne the
model. The reﬁned model can learn the vocabulary, idioms, syntactic structures, and other
linguistic phenomena that are speciﬁc to the new domain.
25.5.1 Pretrained word embeddings
In Section 25.1, we brieﬂy introduced word embeddings. We saw that how similar words
like banana and apple end up with similar vectors, and we saw that we can solve analogy


Section 25.5
Pretraining and Transfer Learning
923
problems with vector subtraction. This indicates that the word embeddings are capturing
substantial information about the words.
In this section we will dive into the details of how word embeddings are created using an
entirely unsupervised process over a large corpus of text. That is in contrast to the embeddings
from Section 25.1, which were built during the process of supervised part of speech tagging,
and thus required POS tags that come from expensive hand annotation.
We will concentrate on one speciﬁc model for word embeddings, the GloVe (Global
Vectors) model. The model starts by gathering counts of how many times each word appears
within a window of another word, similar to the skip-gram model. First choose window size
(perhaps 5 words) and let Xij be the number of times that words i and j co-occur within
a window, and let Xi be the number of times word i co-occurs with any other word. Let
Pij =Xi j/Xi be the probability that word j appears in the context of word i. As before, let Ei
be the word embedding for word i.
Part of the intuition of the GloVe model is that the relationship between two words can
best be captured by comparing them both to other words. Consider the words ice and steam.
Now consider the ratio of their probabilities of co-occurrence with another word, w, that is:
Pw,ice/Pw,steam .
When w is the word solid the ratio will be high (meaning solid applies more to ice) and when
w is the word gas it will be low (meaning gas applies more to steam). And when w is a
non-content word like the, a word like water that is equally relevant to both, or an equally
irrelevant word like fashion, the ratio will be close to 1.
The GloVe model starts with this intuition and goes through some mathematical reason-
ing (Pennington et al., 2014) that converts ratios of probabilities into vector differences and
dot products, eventually arriving at the constraint
Ei ·E′
k = log(Pij).
In other words, the dot product of two word vectors is equal to the log probability of their
co-occurrence. That makes intuitive sense: two nearly-orthogonal vectors have a dot product
close to 0, and two nearly-identical normalized vectors have a dot product close to 1. There
is a technical complication wherein the GloVe model creates two word embedding vectors
for each word, Ei and E′
i; computing the two and then adding them together at the end helps
limit overﬁtting.
Training a model like GloVe is typically much less expensive than training a standard
neural network: a new model can be trained from billions of words of text in a few hours
using a standard desktop CPU.
It is possible to train word embeddings on a speciﬁc domain, and recover knowledge in
that domain. For example, Tshitoyan et al. (2019) used 3.3 million scientiﬁc abstracts on the
subject of material science to train a word embedding model. They found that, just as we saw
that a generic word embedding model can answer “Athens is to Greece as Oslo is to what?”
with “Norway,” their material science model can answer “NiFe is to ferromagnetic as IrMn
is to what?” with “antiferromagnetic.”
Their model does not rely solely on co-occurrence of words; it seems to be capturing
more complex scientiﬁc knowledge. When asked what chemical compounds can be classiﬁed
as “thermoelectric” or “topological insulator,” their model is able to answer correctly. For
example, CsAgGa2Se4 never appears near “thermoelectric” in the corpus, but it does appear


924
Chapter 25
Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing
near “chalcogenide,” “band gap,” and “optoelectric,” which are all clues enabling it to be
classiﬁed as similar to “thermoelectric.” Furthermore, when trained only on abstracts up
to the year 2008 and asked to pick compounds that are “thermoelectric” but have not yet
appeared in abstracts, three of the model’s top ﬁve picks were discovered to be thermoelectric
in papers published between 2009 and 2019.
25.5.2 Pretrained contextual representations
Word embeddings are better representations than atomic word tokens, but there is an impor-
tant issue with polysemous words. For example, the word rose can refer to a ﬂower or the
past tense of rise. Thus, we expect to ﬁnd at least two entirely distinct clusters of word con-
texts for rose: one similar to ﬂower names such as dahlia, and one similar to upsurge. No
single embedding vector can capture both of these simultaneously. Rose is a clear example of
a word with (at least) two distinct meanings, but other words have subtle shades of meaning
that depend on context, such as the word need in you need to see this movie versus humans
need oxygen to survive. And some idiomatic phrases like break the bank are better analyzed
as a whole rather than as component words.
Therefore, instead of just learning a word-to-embedding table, we want to train a model to
generate contextual representations of each word in a sentence. A contextual representation
Contextual
representations
maps both a word and the surrounding context of words into a word embedding vector. In
other words, if we feed this model the word rose and the context the gardener planted a rose
bush, it should produce a contextual embedding that is similar (but not necessarily identical)
to the representation we get with the context the cabbage rose had an unusual fragrance, and
very different from the representation of rose in the context the river rose ﬁve feet.
Figure 25.11 shows a recurrent network that creates contextual word embeddings—the
boxes that are unlabeled in the ﬁgure. We assume we have already built a collection of
noncontextual word embeddings. We feed in one word at a time, and ask the model to predict
the next word. So for example in the ﬁgure at the point where we have reached the word
“car,” the the RNN node at that time step will receive two inputs: the noncontextual word
embedding for “car” and the context, which encodes information from the previous words
“The red.” The RNN node will then output a contextual representation for “car.” The network
as a whole then outputs a prediction for the next word, “is.” We then update the network’s
weights to minimize the error between the prediction and the actual next word.
This model is similar to the one for POS tagging in Figure 25.5, with two important
differences. First, this model is unidirectional (left-to-right), whereas the POS model is bidi-
rectional. Second, instead of predicting the POS tags for the current word, this model predicts
the next word using the prior context. Once the model is built, we can use it to retrieve rep-
resentations for words and pass them on to some other task; we need not continue to predict
the next word. Note that computing a contextual representations always requires two inputs,
the current word and the context.
25.5.3 Masked language models
A weakness of standard language models such as n-gram models is that the contextualization
of each word is based only on the previous words of the sentence. Predictions are made from
left to right. But sometimes context from later in a sentence—for example, feet in the phrase
rose ﬁve feet—helps to clarify earlier words.


