910
Chapter 25
Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing
Yesterday
they
cut
the
rope
Embedding
lookup
Embedding
lookup
Embedding
lookup
Embedding
lookup
Embedding
lookup
Hidden Layer 1
Class = PastTenseVerb
Hidden Layer 2
Output Layer
Figure 25.3 Feedforward part-of-speech tagging model. This model takes a 5-word window
as input and predicts the tag of the word in the middle—here, cut. The model is able to
account for word position because each of the 5 input embeddings is multiplied by a different
part of the ﬁrst hidden layer. The parameter values for the word embeddings and for the three
layers are all learned simultaneously during training.
suggests that this particular occurrence of cut is a past-tense verb; and we might hope, then,
that the embedding will capture the past-referring aspect of adverbs.
POS tagging serves as a good introduction to the application of deep learning to NLP,
without the complications of more complex tasks like question answering (see Section 25.5.3).
Given a corpus of sentences with POS tags, we learn the parameters for the word embeddings
and the POS tagger simultaneously. The process works as follows:
1. Choose the width w (an odd number of words) for the prediction window to be used
to tag each word. A typical value is w=5, meaning that the tag is predicted based on
the word plus the two words to the left and the two words to the right. Split every
sentence in your corpus into overlapping windows of length w. Each window produces
one training example consisting of the w words as input and the POS category of the
middle word as output.
2. Create a vocabulary of all of the unique word tokens that occur more than, say, 5 times
in the training data. Denote the total number of words in the vocabulary as v.
3. Sort this vocabulary in any arbitrary order (perhaps alphabetically).
4. Choose a value d as the size of each word embedding vector.
5. Create a new v-by-d weight matrix called E. This is the word embedding matrix. Row
i of E is the word embedding of the ith word in the vocabulary. Initialize E randomly
(or from pretrained vectors).
6. Set up a neural network that outputs a part of speech label, as shown in Figure 25.3. The
ﬁrst layer will consist of w copies of the embedding matrix. We might use two additional
hidden layers, z1 and z2 (with weight matrices W1 and W2, respectively), followed by


Section 25.2
Recurrent Neural Networks for NLP
911
a softmax layer yielding an output probability distribution ˆy over the possible part-of-
speech categories for the middle word:
z1 = σ(W1x)
z2 = σ(W2z1)
ˆy = softmax(Woutz2).
7. To encode a sequence of w words into an input vector, simply look up the embedding
for each word and concatenate the embedding vectors. The result is a real-valued in-
put vector x of length wd. Even though a given word will have the same embedding
vector whether it occurs in the ﬁrst position, the last, or somewhere in between, each
embedding will be multiplied by a different part of the ﬁrst hidden layer; therefore we
are implicitly encoding the relative position of each word.
8. Train the weights E and the other weight matrices W1, W2, and Wout using gradient
descent. If all goes well, the middle word, cut, will be labeled as a past-tense verb, based
on the evidence in the window, which includes the temporal past word “yesterday,” the
third-person subject pronoun “they” immediately before cut, and so on.
An alternative to word embeddings is a character-level model in which the input is a se-
quence of characters, each encoded as a one-hot vector. Such a model has to learn how
characters come together to form words. The majority of work in NLP sticks with word-level
rather than character-level encodings.
25.2 Recurrent Neural Networks for NLP
We now have a good representation for single words in isolation, but language consists of
an ordered sequence of words in which the context of surrounding words is important. For
simple tasks like part of speech tagging, a small, ﬁxed-size window of perhaps ﬁve words
usually provides enough context.
More complex tasks such as question answering or reference resolution may require
dozens of words as context. For example, in the sentence “Eduardo told me that Miguel
was very sick so I took him to the hospital,” knowing that him refers to Miguel and not
Eduardo requires context that spans from the ﬁrst to the last word of the 14-word sentence.
25.2.1 Language models with recurrent neural networks
We’ll start with the problem of creating a language model with sufﬁcient context. Recall that
a language model is a probability distribution over sequences of words. It allows us to predict
the next word in a text given all the previous words, and is often used as a building block for
more complex tasks.
Building a language model with either an n-gram model (as in Section 24.1) or a feedfor-
ward network with a ﬁxed window of n words can run into difﬁculty due to the problem of
context: either the required context will exceed the ﬁxed window size or the model will have
too many parameters, or both.
In addition, a feedforward network has the problem of asymmetry: whatever it learns
about, say, the appearance of the word him as the 12th word of the sentence it will have to
relearn for the appearance of him at other positions in the sentence, because the weights are
different for each word position.


912
Chapter 25
Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing
Δ
Figure 25.4 (a) Schematic diagram of an RNN where the hidden layer z has recurrent con-
nections; the ∆symbol indicates a delay. Each input x is the word embedding vector of the
next word in the sentence. Each output y is the output for that time step. (b) The same net-
work unrolled over three timesteps to create a feedforward network. Note that the weights
are shared across all timesteps.
In Section 22.6, we introduced the recurrent neural network or RNN, which is designed
to process time-series data, one datum at a time. This suggests that RNNs might be useful for
processing language, one word at a time. We repeat Figure 22.8 here as Figure 25.4.
In an RNN language model each input word is encoded as a word embedding vector, xi.
There is a hidden layer zt which gets passed as input from one time step to the next. We are
interested in doing multiclass classiﬁcation: the classes are the words of the vocabulary. Thus
the output yt will be a softmax probability distribution over the possible values of the next
word in the sentence.
The RNN architecture solves the problem of too many parameters. The number of param-
eters in the weight matrixes w,z,z, w,x,z, and w,z,y stays constant, regardless of the number of
words—it is O(1). This is in contrast to feedforward networks, which have O(n) parameters,
and n-gram models, which have O(vn) parameters, where v is the size of the vocabulary.
The RNN architecture also solves the problem of asymmetry, because the weights are the
same for every word position.
The RNN architecture can sometimes solve the limited context problem as well. In theory
there is no limit to how far back in the input the model can look. Each update of the hidden
layer zt has access to both the current input word xt and the previous hidden layer zt−1,
which means that information about any word in the input can be kept in the hidden layer
indeﬁnitely, copied over (or modiﬁed as appropriate) from one time step to the next. Of
course, there is a limited amount of storage in z, so it can’t remember everything about all the
previous words.
In practice RNN models perform well on a variety of tasks, but not on all tasks. It can be
hard to predict whether they will be succesful for a given problem. One factor that contributes
to success is that the training process encourages the network to allocate storage space in z to
the aspects of the input that will actually prove to be useful.
To train an RNN language model, we use the training process described in Section 22.6.1.
The inputs, xt, are the words in a training corpus of text, and the observed outputs are the same


