928
Chapter 25
Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing
There are limitations of ARISTO. It deals only with multiple-choice questions, not essay
questions, and it can neither read nor generate diagrams.1
T5 (the Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer) is designed to produce textual responses to
various kinds of textual input. It includes a standard encoder–decoder transformer model,
pretrained on 35 billion words from the 750 GB Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus (C4). This
unlabeled training is designed to give the model generalizable linguistic knowledge that will
be useful for multiple speciﬁc tasks. T5 is then trained for each task with input consisting of
the task name, followed by a colon and some content. For example, when given “translate
English to German: That is good,” it produces as output “Das ist gut.” For some tasks, the
input is marked up; for example in the Winograd Schema Challenge, the input highlights a
pronoun with an ambiguous referent. Given the input “referent: The city councilmen refused
the demonstrators a permit because they feared violence,” the correct response is “The city
councilmen” (not “the demonstrators”).
Much work remains to be done to improve NLP systems. One issue is that transformer
models rely on only a narrow context, limited to a few hundred words. Some experimental
approaches are trying to extend that context; the Reformer system (Kitaev et al., 2020) can
handle context of up to a million words.
Recent results have shown that using more training data results in better models—for
example, ROBERTA achieved state-of-the-art results after training on 2.2 trillion words. If
using more textual data is better, what would happen if we included other types of data:
structured databases, numerical data, images, and video? We would need a breakthrough in
hardware processing speeds to train on a large corpus of video, and we may need several
breakthroughs in AI as well.
The curious reader may wonder why we learned about grammars, parsing, and semantic
interpretation in the previous chapter, only to discard those notions in favor of purely data-
driven models in this chapter? At present, the answer is simply that the data-driven models
are easier to develop and maintain, and score better on standard benchmarks, compared to
the hand-built systems that can be constructed using a reasonable amount of human effort
with the approaches described in Chapter 24. It may be that transformer models and their
relatives are learning latent representations that capture the same basic ideas as grammars
and semantic information, or it may be that something entirely different is happening within
these enormous models; we simply don’t know. We do know that a system that is trained with
textual data is easier to maintain and to adapt to new domains and new natural languages than
a system that relies on hand-crafted features.
It may also be the case that future breakthroughs in explicit grammatical and semantic
modeling will cause the pendulum to swing back. Perhaps more likely is the emergence of
hybrid approaches that combine the best concepts from both chapters. For example, Kitaev
and Klein (2018) used an attention mechanism to improve a traditional constituency parser,
achieving the best result ever recorded on the Penn Treebank test set. Similarly, Ringgaard
et al. (2017) demonstrate how a dependency parser can be improved with word embeddings
and a recurrent neural network. Their system, SLING, parses directly into a semantic frame
representation, mitigating the problem of errors building up in a traditional pipeline system.
1
It has been pointed out that in some multiple-choice exams, it is possible to get a good score even without
looking at the questions, because there are tell-tale signs in the incorrect answers (Gururangan et al., 2018). That
seems to be true for visual question answering as well (Chao et al., 2018) .


Bibliographical and Historical Notes
929
There is certainly room for improvement: not only do NLP systems still lag human per-
formance on many tasks, but they do so after processing thousands of times more text than
any human could read in a lifetime. This suggests that there is plenty of scope for new insights
from linguists, psychologists, and NLP researchers.
Summary
The key points of this chapter are as follows:
• Continuous representations of words with word embeddings are more robust than dis-
crete atomic representations, and can be pretrained using unlabeled text data.
• Recurrent neural networks can effectively model local and long-distance context by
retaining relevant information in their hidden-state vectors.
• Sequence-to-sequence models can be used for machine translation and text generation
problems.
• Transformer models use self-attention and can model long-distance context as well as
local context. They can make effective use of hardware matrix multiplication.
• Transfer learning that includes pretrained contextual word embeddings allows models to
be developed from very large unlabeled corpora and applied to a range of tasks. Models
that are pretrained to predict missing words can handle other tasks such as question
answering and textual entailment, after ﬁne-tuning for the target domain.
Bibliographical and Historical Notes
The distribution of words and phrases in natural language follow Zipf’s Law (Zipf, 1935,
1949): the frequency of the nth most popular word is roughly inversely proportional to n.
That means we have a data sparsity problem: even with billions of words of training data, we
are constantly running into novel words and phrases that were not seen before.
Generalization to novel words and phrases is aided by representations that capture the
basic insight that words with similar meanings appear in similar contexts. Deerwester et al.
(1990) projected words into low-dimensional vectors by decomposing the co-occurrence ma-
trix formed by words and the documents the words appear in. Another possibility is to treat
the surrounding words—say, a 5-word window—as context. Brown et al. (1992) grouped
words into hierarchical clusters according to the bigram context of words; this has proven to
be effective for tasks such as named entity recognition (Turian et al., 2010). The WORD2VEC
system (Mikolov et al., 2013) was the ﬁrst signiﬁcant demonstration of the advantages of
word embeddings obtained from training neural networks. The GloVe word embedding vec-
tors (Pennington et al., 2014) were obtained by operating directly on a word co-occurrence
matrix obtained from billions of words of text. Levy and Goldberg (2014) explain why and
how these word embeddings are able to capture linguistic regularities.
Bengio et al. (2003) pioneered the use of neural networks for language models, proposing
to combine “(1) a distributed representation for each word along with (2) the probability func-
tion for word sequences, expressed in terms of these representations.” Mikolov et al. (2010)
demonstrated the use of RNNs for modeling local context in language models. Jozefowicz


930
Chapter 25
Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing
et al. (2016) showed how an RNN trained on a billion words can outperform carefully hand-
crafted n-gram models. Contextual representations for words were emphasized by Peters
et al. (2018), who called them ELMO (Embeddings from Language Models) representations.
Note that some authors compare language models by measuring their perplexity. The
Perplexity
perplexity of a probability distribution is 2H, where H is the entropy of the distribution (see
Section 19.3.3). A language model with lower perplexity is, all other things being equal, a
better model. But in practice, all other things are rarely equal. Therefore it is more informa-
tive to measure performance on a real task rather than relying on perplexity.
Howard and Ruder (2018) describe the ULMFIT (Universal Language Model Fine-
tuning) framework, which makes it easier to ﬁne-tune a pretrained language model without
requiring a vast corpus of target-domain documents. Ruder et al. (2019) give a tutorial on
transfer learning for NLP.
Mikolov et al. (2010) introduced the idea of using RNNs for NLP, and Sutskever et al.
(2015) introduced the idea of sequence to sequence learning with deep networks. Zhu et al.
(2017) and (Liu et al., 2018b) showed that an unsupervised approach works, and makes
data collection much easier. It was soon found that these kinds of models could perform
surprisingly well at a variety of tasks, for example, image captioning (Karpathy and Fei-Fei,
2015; Vinyals et al., 2017b).
Devlin et al. (2018) showed that transformer models pretrained with the masked language
modeling objective can be directly used for multiple tasks. The model was called BERT
(Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers). Pretrained BERT models can be
ﬁne-tuned for particular domains and particular tasks, including question answering, named
entity recognition, text classiﬁcation, sentiment analysis, and natural language inference.
The XLNET system (Yang et al., 2019) improves on BERT by eliminating a discrepancy
between the pretraining and ﬁne-tuning. The ERNIE 2.0 framework (Sun et al., 2019) extracts
more from the training data by considering sentence order and the presence of named entities,
rather than just co-occurrence of words, and was shown to outperform BERT and XLNET.
In response, researchers revisited and improved on BERT: the ROBERTA system (Liu et al.,
2019b) used more data and different hyperparameters and training procedures, and found that
it could match XLNET. The Reformer system (Kitaev et al., 2020) extends the range of the
context that can be considered all the way up to a million words. Meanwhile, ALBERT (A
Lite BERT) went in the other direction, reducing the number of parameters from 108 million
to 12 million (so as to ﬁt on mobile devices) while maintaining high accuracy.
The XLM system (Lample and Conneau, 2019) is a transformer model with training
data from multiple languages. This is useful for machine translation, but also provides more
robust representations for monolingual tasks. Two other important systems, GPT-2 (Radford
et al., 2019) and T5 (Raffel et al., 2019), were described in the chapter. The later paper also
introduced the 35 billion word Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus (C4).
Various promising improvements on pretraining algorithms have been proposed (Yang
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019b). Pretrained contextual models are described by Peters et al.
(2018) and Dai and Le (2016).
The GLUE (General Language Understanding Evaluation) benchmark, a collection of
tasks and tools for evaluating NLP systems, was introduced by Wang et al. (2018a). Tasks
include question answering, sentiment analysis, textual entailment, translation, and parsing.
Transformer models have so dominated the leaderboard (the human baseline is way down at


