1028
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
see depth if the images presented to the left and right eyes are slightly different was demon-
strated by Wheatstone’s (1838) invention of the stereoscope. The device immediately became
popular in parlors and salons throughout Europe.
The essential concept of binocular stereopsis—that two images of a scene taken from
slightly different viewpoints carry information sufﬁcient to obtain a three-dimensional re-
construction of the scene—was exploited in the ﬁeld of photogrammetry. Key mathematical
results were obtained; for example, Kruppa (1913) proved that, given two views of ﬁve dis-
tinct points in a scene, one could reconstruct the rotation and translation between the two
camera positions as well as the depth of the scene (up to a scale factor).
Although the geometry of stereopsis had been understood for a long time, the corre-
spondence problem in photogrammetry used to be solved by humans trying to match up
corresponding points. The amazing ability of humans in solving the correspondence problem
was illustrated by Julesz’s (1971) random dot stereograms. The ﬁeld of computer vision has
devoted much effort towards an automatic solution of the correspondence problem.
In the ﬁrst half of the 20th century, the most signiﬁcant research results in vision were
obtained by the Gestalt school of psychology, led by Max Wertheimer. They pointed out the
importance of perceptual organization: for a human, the image is not a collection of pointillist
photoreceptor outputs (pixels), rather it is organized into coherent groups. The computer
vision task of ﬁnding regions and curves traces back to this insight. The Gestaltists also drew
attention to the “ﬁgure-ground” phenomenon—a contour separating two image regions that
in the world are at different depths appears to belong only to the nearer region, the “ﬁgure,”
and not to the farther region, the “ground.”
The gestalt work was carried on by J. J. Gibson (1950, 1979), who pointed out the impor-
tance of optical ﬂow and texture gradients in the estimation of environmental variables such
as surface slant and tilt. He reemphasized the importance of the stimulus and how rich it was.
Gibson, Olum, and Rosenblatt (1955) pointed out that the optical ﬂow ﬁeld contained enough
information to determine the motion of the observer relative to the environment. Gibson par-
ticularly emphasized the role of the active observer, whose self-directed movement facilitates
the pickup of information about the external environment.
Computer vision dates back to the 1960s. Roberts’s (1963) thesis at MIT on perceiving
cubes and other blocks-world objects was one of the earliest publications in the ﬁeld. Roberts
introduced several key ideas, including edge detection and model-based matching.
In the 1960s and 1970s progress was slow, hampered by the lack of computational and
storage resources. Low-level visual processing received a lot of attention, with techniques
drawn from related ﬁelds such as signal processing, pattern recognition, and data clustering.
Edge detection was treated as an essential ﬁrst step in image processing, as it reduced
the amount of data to be processed. The widely used Canny edge detection technique was
introduced by John Canny (1986). Martin, Fowlkes, and Malik (2004) showed how to com-
bine multiple clues, such as brightness, texture and color, in a machine learning framework
to better ﬁnd boundary curves.
The closely related problem of ﬁnding regions of coherent brightness, color, and texture
naturally lends itself to formulations where ﬁnding the best partition becomes an optimization
problem. Three leading examples are based on Markov Random Fields due to Geman and
Geman (1984), the variational formulation of Mumford and Shah (1989), and normalized
cuts by Shi and Malik (2000).


Bibliographical and Historical Notes
1029
Through much of the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, there were two distinct paradigms in
which visual recognition was pursued, dictated by different perspectives on what was per-
ceived to be the primary problem. Computer vision research on object recognition largely fo-
cused on issues arising from the projection of three-dimensional objects onto two-dimensional
images. The idea of alignment, also ﬁrst introduced by Roberts, resurfaced in the 1980s in
the work of Lowe (1987) and Huttenlocher and Ullman (1990).
The pattern recognition community took a different approach, viewing the 3D–to–2D
aspects of the problem as insigniﬁcant. Their motivating examples were in domains such
as optical character recognition and handwritten zip code recognition, in which the primary
concern is that of learning the typical variations characteristic of a class of objects and sep-
arating them from other classes. We can trace neural net architectures for image analysis
back to Hubel and Wiesel’s (1962, 1968) studies of the visual cortex in cats and monkeys.
They developed a hierarchical model of the visual pathway with neurons in lower areas of the
brain (especially the area called V1) responding to features such as oriented edges and bars,
and neurons in higher areas responding to more speciﬁc stimuli (“grandmother cells” in the
cartoon version).
Fukushima (1980) proposed a neural network architecture for pattern recognition explic-
itly motivated by Hubel and Wiesel’s hierarchy. His model had alternating layers of simple
cells and complex cells, thus incorporating downsampling, and also had shift invariance, thus
incorporating convolutional structure. LeCun et al. (1989) took the additional step of using
back-propagation to train the weights of this network, and what we today call convolutional
neural networks were born. See LeCun et al. (1995) for a comparison of approaches.
Starting in the late 1990s, accompanying a much greater role of probabilistic modeling
and statistical machine learning in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence in general, there was a
rapprochement between these two traditions. Two lines of work contributed signiﬁcantly.
One was research on face detection (Rowley et al., 1998; Viola and Jones, 2004) that demon-
strated the power of pattern recognition techniques on clearly important and useful tasks.
The other was the development of point descriptors, which enable the construction of
feature vectors from parts of objects (Schmid and Mohr, 1996). There are three key strategies
to build a good local point descriptor: one uses orientations to get illumination invariance; one
needs to describe image structure close to a point in detail, and further away only roughly; and
one needs to use spatial histograms to suppress variations caused by small errors in locating
the point. Lowe’s (2004) SIFT descriptor exploited these ideas very effectively; another
popular variant was the HOG descriptor due to Dalal and Triggs (2005).
The 1990s and 2000s saw a continuing debate between the devotees of clever feature
design such as SIFT and HOG and the aﬁcionados of neural networks who believed that good
features should emerge automatically from end-to-end training. The way to settle such a
debate is through benchmarks on standard data sets, and in the 2000s results on a standard
object detection data set, PASCAL VOC, argued in favor of hand-designed features. This
changed when Krizhevsky et al. (2013) showed that on the task of image classiﬁcation on the
ImageNet data set, their neural network (called AlexNet) gave signiﬁcantly lower error rates
than the mainstream computer vision techniques.
What was the secret sauce behind the success of AlexNet? Besides the technical innova-
tions (such as the use of ReLU activation units) we must give a lot of credit to big data and
big computation. By big data we mean the availability of large data sets with category labels,


1030
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
such as ImageNet, which provided the training data for these large, deep networks with mil-
lions of parameters. Previous data sets like Caltech-101 or PASCAL VOC didn’t have enough
training data, and MNIST and CIFAR were regarded as “toy data sets” by the computer vi-
sion community. This strand of labeling data sets for benchmarking and for extracting image
statistics itself was enabled by the desire of people to upload their photo collections to the
Internet on sites such as Flickr. The way big computation proved most helpful was through
GPUs, a hardware development initially driven by the needs of the video game industry.
Within a year or two, the evidence was quite clear. For example, the region-based con-
volutional neural network (RCNN) work of Girshick et al. (2016) showed that the AlexNet
architecture could be modiﬁed, by making use of computer vision ideas such as region pro-
posals, to make possible state-of-the-art object detection on PASCAL VOC. We have realized
that generally deeper networks work better and that overﬁtting fears are overblown. We have
new techniques such as batch normalization to deal with regularization.
The reconstruction of three-dimensional structure from multiple views has its roots in
the photogrammetry literature. In the computer vision era, Ullman (1979), and Longuet-
Higgins (1981) are inﬂuential early works. Concerns about the stability of structure from
motion were signiﬁcantly allayed by the work of Tomasi and Kanade (1992) who showed that
with the use of multiple frames, and the resulting wide baseline, shape could be recovered
quite accurately.
A conceptual innovation introduced in the 1990s was the study of projective structure
from motion. Here camera calibration is not necessary, as was shown by Faugeras (1992).
This discovery is related to the introduction of the use of geometrical invariants in object
recognition, as surveyed by Mundy and Zisserman (1992), and the development of afﬁne
structure from motion by Koenderink and Van Doorn (1991).
In the 1990s, with great increase in computer speed and storage and the widespread avail-
ability of digital video, motion analysis found many new applications. Building geometrical
models of real-world scenes for rendering by computer graphics techniques proved particu-
larly popular, led by reconstruction algorithms such as the one developed by Debevec et al.
(1996). The books by Hartley and Zisserman (2000) and Faugeras et al. (2001) provide a
comprehensive treatment of the geometry of multiple views.
Humans can perceive shape and spatial layout from a single image, and modeling this
has proved to be quite a challenge for computer vision researchers. Inferring shape from
shading was ﬁrst studied by Berthold Horn (1970), and Horn and Brooks (1989) present an
extensive survey of the main papers from a period when this was a much studied problem.
Gibson (1950) was the ﬁrst to propose texture gradients as a cue to shape. The mathematics
of occluding contours, and more generally understanding the visual events in the projection
of smooth curved objects, owes much to the work of Koenderink and van Doorn, which ﬁnds
an extensive treatment in Koenderink’s (1990) Solid Shape.
More recently, attention has turned to treating the problem of shape and surface recovery
from a single image as a probabilistic inference problem, where geometrical cues are not
modeled explicitly, but used implicitly in a learning framework. A good example is the work
of Hoiem et al. (2007); recently this has been reworked using deep neural networks.
Turning now to the applications of computer vision for guiding action, Dickmanns and
Zapp (1987) ﬁrst demonstrated a self-driving car driving on freeways at high speeds; Pomer-
leau (1993) achieved similar performance using a neural network approach. Today building


Bibliographical and Historical Notes
1031
self-driving cars is a big business, with the established car companies competing with new
entrants such as Baidu, Cruise, Didi, Google Waymo, Lyft, Mobileye, Nuro, Nvidia, Sam-
sung, Tata, Tesla, Uber, and Voyage to market systems that provide capabilities ranging from
driver assistance to full autonomy.
For the reader interested in human vision, Vision Science: Photons to Phenomenology by
Stephen Palmer (1999) provides the best comprehensive treatment; Visual Perception: Phys-
iology, Psychology and Ecology by Vicki Bruce, Patrick Green, and Mark Georgeson (2003)
is a shorter textbook. The books Eye, Brain and Vision by David Hubel (1988) and Per-
ception by Irvin Rock (1984) are friendly introductions centered on neurophysiology and
perception respectively. David Marr’s book Vision (Marr, 1982) played a historical role in
connecting computer vision to the traditional areas of biological vision—psychophysics and
neurobiology. While many of his speciﬁc models for tasks such as edge detection and ob-
ject recognition haven’t stood the test of time, the theoretical perspective where each task is
analyzed at an informational, computational, and implementation level is still illuminating.
For the ﬁeld of computer vision, the most comprehensive textbooks available today are
Computer Vision: A Modern Approach (Forsyth and Ponce, 2002) and Computer Vision:
Algorithms and Applications (Szeliski, 2011). Geometrical problems in computer vision are
treated thoroughly in Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision (Hartley and Zisserman,
2000). These books were written before the deep learning revolution, so for the latest results,
consult the primary literature.
Two of the main journals for computer vision are the IEEE Transactions on Pattern Anal-
ysis and Machine Intelligence and the International Journal of Computer Vision. Computer
vision conferences include ICCV (International Conference on Computer Vision), CVPR
(Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition), and ECCV (European Conference on Com-
puter Vision). Research with a signiﬁcant machine learning component is also published
at NeurIPS (Neural Information Processing Systems), and work on the interface with com-
puter graphics often appears at the ACM SIGGRAPH (Special Interest Group in Graphics)
conference. Many vision papers appear as preprints on the arXiv server, and early reports of
new results appear in blogs from the major research labs.


