998
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
So the smoothing function is achieved by convolving the image with the Gaussian, I ∗Gσ. A
σ of 1 pixel is enough to smooth over a small amount of noise, whereas 2 pixels will smooth
a larger amount, but at the loss of some detail. Because the Gaussian’s inﬂuence fades rapidly
with distance, in practice we can replace the ±∞in the sums with something like ±3σ.
We have a chance to make an optimization here: we can combine the smoothing and
the edge ﬁnding into a single operation. It is a theorem that for any functions f and g, the
derivative of the convolution, (f ∗g)′, is equal to the convolution with the derivative, f ∗(g′).
So rather than smoothing the image and then differentiating, we can just convolve the image
with the derivative of the Gaussian smoothing function, G′
σ. We then mark as edges those
peaks in the response that are above some threshold, chosen to eliminate spurious peaks due
to noise.
There is a natural generalization of this algorithm from one-dimensional crosssections to
general 2D images. In two dimensions edges may be at any angle θ. Considering the image
brightness as a scalar function of the variables x, y, its gradient is a vector
∇I =


∂I
∂x
∂I
∂y


Edges correspond to locations in images where the brightness undergoes a sharp change,
and thus the magnitude of the gradient, ||∇I|| should be large at an edge point. When the
image gets brighter or darker, the gradient vector at each point gets longer or shorter, but the
direction of the gradient
∇I
||∇I|| =
 cosθ
sinθ

does not change. This gives us a θ = θ(x,y) at every pixel, which deﬁnes the edge orientation
Orientation
at that pixel. This feature is often useful, because it does not depend on image intensity.
As you might expect from the discussion on detecting edges in one-dimensional signals,
to form the gradient, we don’t actually compute ∇I, but rather ∇(I ∗Gσ), after smoothing the
image by convolving it with a Gaussian. A property of convolutions is that this is equivalent
to convolving the image with the partial derivatives of the Gaussian. Once we have computed
the gradient, we can obtain edges by ﬁnding edge points and linking them together. To tell
whether a point is an edge point, we must look at other points a small distance forward and
back along the direction of the gradient. If the gradient magnitude at one of these points is
larger, then we could get a better edge point by shifting the edge curve very slightly. Further-
more, if the gradient magnitude is too small, the point cannot be an edge point. So at an edge
point, the gradient magnitude is a local maximum along the direction of the gradient, and the
gradient magnitude is above a suitable threshold.
Once we have marked edge pixels by this algorithm, the next stage is to link those pixels
that belong to the same edge curves. This can be done by assuming that any two neighboring
pixels that are both edge pixels with consistent orientations belong to the same edge curve.
Edge detection isn’t perfect. Figure 27.8(a) shows an image of a scene containing a
stapler resting on a desk, and Figure 27.8(b) shows the output of an edge detection algorithm
on this image. As you can see, the output is not perfect: there are gaps where no edge appears,
and there are “noise” edges that do not correspond to anything of signiﬁcance in the scene.
Later stages of processing will have to correct for these errors.


Section 27.3
Simple Image Features
999
Figure 27.8 (a) Photograph of a stapler. (b) Edges computed from (a).
27.3.2 Texture
In everyday language, the texture of surfaces hints at what they feel like when you run a
Texture
ﬁnger over them (the words “texture,” “textile,” and “text” have the same Latin root, a word
for weaving). In computational vision, texture refers to a pattern on a surface that can be
sensed visually. Usually, these patterns are roughly regular. Examples include the pattern of
windows on a building, the stitches on a sweater, the spots on a leopard’s skin, blades of grass
on a lawn, pebbles on a beach, and a crowd of people in a stadium.
Sometimes the arrangement is quite periodic, as in the stitches on a sweater; in other
instances, such as pebbles on a beach, the regularity is only in a statistical sense: the density
of pebbles is roughly the same on different parts of the beach. A usual rough model of texture
is a repetitive pattern of elements, sometimes called texels. This model is quite useful because
Texels
it is surprisingly hard to make or ﬁnd real textures that never repeat.
Texture is a property of an image patch, rather than a pixel in isolation. A good descrip-
tion of a patch’s texture should summarize what the patch looks like. The description should
not change when the lighting changes. This rules out using edge points; if a texture is brightly
lit, many locations within the patch will have high contrast and will generate edge points; but
if the same texture is viewed under less bright light, many of these edges will not be above
the threshold. The description should change in a sensible way when the patch rotates. It is
important to preserve the difference between vertical stripes and horizontal stripes but not if
the vertical stripes are rotated to the horizontal.
Texture representations with these properties have been shown to be useful for two key
tasks. The ﬁrst is identifying objects—a zebra and horse have similar shape, but different
textures. The second is matching patches in one image to patches in another image, a key
step in recovering 3D information from multiple images (Section 27.6.1).
Here is a basic construction for a texture representation. Given an image patch, compute
the gradient orientation at each pixel in the patch, and then characterize the patch by a his-
togram of orientations. Gradient orientations are largely invariant to changes in illumination
(the gradient will get longer, but it will not change direction). The histogram of orientations
seems to capture important aspects of the texture. For example, vertical stripes will have two
peaks in the histogram (one for the left side of each stripe and one for the right); leopard spots
will have more uniformly distributed orientations.
But we do not know how big a patch to describe. There are two strategies. In specialized
applications, image information reveals how big the patch should be (for example, one might


1000
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
grow a patch full of stripes until it covers the zebra). An alternative is to describe a patch
centered at each pixel for a range of scales. This range usually runs from a few pixels to the
extent of the image. Now divide the patch into bins, and in each bin construct an orientation
histogram, then summarize the pattern of histograms across bins. It is no longer usual to
construct these descriptions by hand. Instead, convolutional neural networks are used to
produce texture representations. But the representations constructed by the networks seem to
mirror this construction very roughly.
27.3.3 Optical ﬂow
Next, let us consider what happens when we have a video sequence, instead of just a single
static image. Whenever there is relative movement between the camera and one or more
objects in the scene, the resulting apparent motion in the image is called optical ﬂow. This
Optical ﬂow
describes the direction and speed of motion of features in the image as a result of relative
motion between the viewer and the scene. For example, distant objects viewed from a moving
car have much slower apparent motion than nearby objects, so the rate of apparent motion
can tell us something about distance.
In Figure 27.9 we show two frames from a video of a tennis player. On the right we
display the optical ﬂow vectors computed from these images. The optical ﬂow encodes useful
information about scene structure—the tennis player is moving and the background (largely)
isn’t. Furthermore, the ﬂow vectors reveal something about what the player is doing—one
arm and one leg are moving fast, and the other body parts aren’t.
The optical ﬂow vector ﬁeld can be represented by its components vx(x,y) in the x direc-
tion and vy(x,y) in the y direction. To measure optical ﬂow, we need to ﬁnd corresponding
points between one time frame and the next. A very simple-minded technique is based on the
fact that image patches around corresponding points have similar intensity patterns. Consider
a block of pixels centered at pixel p, (x0,y0), at time t. This block of pixels is to be compared
with pixel blocks centered at various candidate pixels qi at (x0 +Dx,y0 +Dy) at time t +Dt.
One possible measure of similarity is the sum of squared differences (SSD):
Sum of squared
diﬀerences (SSD)
SSD(Dx,Dy) = ∑
(x,y)
(I(x,y,t)−I(x+Dx,y+Dy,t +Dt))2 .
Figure 27.9 Two frames of a video sequence and the optical ﬂow ﬁeld corresponding to the
displacement from one frame to the other. Note how the movement of the tennis racket and
the front leg is captured by the directions of the arrows. (Images courtesy of Thomas Brox.)


Section 27.3
Simple Image Features
1001
Here, (x,y) ranges over pixels in the block centered at (x0,y0). We ﬁnd the (Dx,Dy) that
minimizes the SSD. The optical ﬂow at (x0,y0) is then (vx,vy) = (Dx/Dt,Dy/Dt). Note that
for this to work, there should be some texture in the scene, resulting in windows containing a
signiﬁcant variation in brightness among the pixels. If one is looking at a uniform white wall,
then the SSD is going to be nearly the same for the different candidate matches q, and the
algorithm is reduced to making a blind guess. The best-performing algorithms for measuring
optical ﬂow rely on a variety of additional constraints to deal with situations in which the
scene is only partially textured.
27.3.4 Segmentation of natural images
Segmentation is the process of breaking an image into groups of similar pixels. The basic
Segmentation
idea is that each image pixel can be associated with certain visual properties, such as bright-
ness, color, and texture. Within an object, or a single part of an object, these attributes vary
relatively little, whereas across an inter-object boundary there is typically a large change in
one or more of these attributes. We need to ﬁnd a partition of the image into sets of pixels
such that these constraints are satisﬁed as well as possible. Notice that it isn’t enough just to
ﬁnd edges, because many edges are not object boundaries. So, for example, a tiger in grass
may generate an edge on each side of each stripe and each blade of grass. In all the confusing
edge data, we may miss the tiger for the stripes.
There are two ways of studying the problem, one focusing on detecting the boundaries of
these groups, and the other on detecting the groups themselves, called regions. We illustrate
Regions
this in Figure 27.10, showing boundary detection in (b) and region extraction in (c) and (d).
One way to formalize the problem of detecting boundary curves is as a classiﬁcation
problem, amenable to the techniques of machine learning. A boundary curve at pixel location
(x,y) will have an orientation θ. An image neighborhood centered at (x,y) looks roughly
like a disk, cut into two halves by a diameter oriented at θ. We can compute the probability
Pb(x,y,θ) that there is a boundary curve at that pixel along that orientation by comparing
features in the two halves. The natural way to predict this probability is to train a machine
learning classiﬁer using a data set of natural images in which humans have marked the ground
truth boundaries—the goal of the classiﬁer is to mark exactly those boundaries marked by
humans and no others.
Boundaries detected by this technique are better than those found using the simple edge
detection technique described previously. But there are still two limitations: (1) the boundary
pixels formed by thresholding Pb(x,y,θ) are not guaranteed to form closed curves, so this
approach doesn’t deliver regions, and (2) the decision making exploits only local context,
and does not use global consistency constraints.
The alternative approach is based on trying to “cluster” the pixels into regions based on
their brightness, color and texture properties. There are a number of different ways in which
this intuition can be formalized mathematically. For instance, Shi and Malik (2000) set this
up as a graph partitioning problem. The nodes of the graph correspond to pixels, and edges
to connections between pixels. The weight Wij on the edge connecting a pair of pixels i and
j is based on how similar the two pixels are in brightness, color, texture, etc. They then
ﬁnd partitions that minimize a normalized cut criterion. Roughly speaking, the criterion for
partitioning the graph is to minimize the sum of weights of connections across the groups and
maximize the sum of weights of connections within the groups.


1002
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 27.10 (a) Original image. (b) Boundary contours, where the higher the Pb value,
the darker the contour. (c) Segmentation into regions, corresponding to a ﬁne partition of
the image. Regions are rendered in their mean colors. (d) Segmentation into regions, corre-
sponding to a coarser partition of the image, resulting in fewer regions. (Images courtesy of
Pablo Arbelaez, Michael Maire, Charless Fowlkes and Jitendra Malik.)
It turns out that the approaches based on ﬁnding boundaries and on ﬁnding regions can
be coupled, but we will not explore these possibilities here. Segmentation based purely on
low-level, local attributes such as brightness and color can not be expected to deliver the ﬁnal
correct boundaries of all the objects in the scene. To reliably ﬁnd boundaries associated with
objects, it is also necessary to incorporate high-level knowledge of the kinds of objects one
may expect to encounter in a scene. At this time, a popular strategy is to produce an over-
segmentation of an image, where one is guaranteed not to have missed marking any of the true
boundaries but may have marked many extra false boundaries as well. The resulting regions,
called superpixels, provide a signiﬁcant reduction in computational complexity for various
algorithms, as the number of superpixels may be in the hundreds, compared to millions of
raw pixels. Exploiting high-level knowledge of objects is the subject of the next section, and
actually detecting the objects in images is the subject of Section 27.5.
27.4 Classifying Images
Image classiﬁcation applies to two main cases. In one, the images are of objects, taken from
a given taxonomy of classes, and there’s not much else of signiﬁcance in the picture—for
example, a catalog of clothing or furniture images, where the background doesn’t matter, and
the output of the classiﬁer is “cashmere sweater” or “desk chair.”
In the other case, each image shows a scene containing multiple objects. So in grassland
you might see a giraffe and a lion, and in the living room you might see a couch and lamp,
but you don’t expect a giraffe or a submarine in a living room. We now have methods for
large-scale image classiﬁcation that can accurately output “grassland” or “living room.”
Modern systems classify images using appearance (i.e., color and texture, as opposed
Appearance
to geometry). There are two difﬁculties. First, different instances of the same class could
look different—some cats are black and others are orange. Second, the same cat could look


