CHAPTER 27
COMPUTER VISION
In which we connect the computer to the raw, unwashed world through the eyes of a camera.
Most animals have eyes, often at signiﬁcant cost: eyes take up a lot of space; use energy;
and are quite fragile. This cost is justiﬁed by the immense value that eyes provide. An agent
that can see can predict the future—it can tell what it might bump into; it can tell whether to
attack or to ﬂee or to court; it can guess whether the ground ahead is swampy or ﬁrm; and
it can tell how far away the fruit is. In this chapter, we describe how to recover information
from the ﬂood of data that comes from eyes or cameras.
27.1 Introduction
Vision is a perceptual channel that accepts a stimulus and reports some representation of the
world. Most agents that use vision use passive sensing—they do not need to send out light
to see. In contrast, active sensing involves sending out a signal such as radar or ultrasound,
and sensing a reﬂection. Examples of agents that use active sensing include bats (ultrasound),
dolphins (sound), abyssal ﬁshes (light), and some robots (light, sound, radar). To understand
a perceptual channel, one must study both the physical and statistical phenomena that occur
in sensing and what the perceptual process should produce. We concentrate on vision in this
chapter, but robots in the real world use a variety of sensors to perceive sound, touch, distance,
temperature, global position, and acceleration.
A feature is a number obtained by applying simple computations to an image. Very use-
Feature
ful information can be obtained directly from features. The wumpus agent had ﬁve sensors,
each of which extracted a single bit of information. These bits, which are features, could
be interpreted directly by the program. As another example, many ﬂying animals compute a
simple feature that gives a good estimate of time to contact with a nearby object; this feature
can be passed directly to muscles that control steering or wings, allowing very fast changes of
direction. This feature extraction approach emphasizes simple, direct computations applied
to sensor responses.
The model-based approach to vision uses two kinds of models. An object model could
be the kind of precise geometric model produced by computer aided design systems. It could
also be a vague statement about general properties of objects, for example, the claim that all
faces viewed in low resolution look approximately the same. A rendering model describes
the physical, geometric, and statistical processes that produce the stimulus from the world.
While rendering models are now sophisticated and exact, the stimulus is usually ambiguous.
A white object under low light may look like a black object under intense light. A small,
nearby object may look the same as a large, distant object. Without additional evidence,


Section 27.2
Image Formation
989
we cannot tell if what we see is a toy Godzilla tearing up a toy building, or a real monster
destroying a real building.
There are two main ways to manage these ambiguities. First, some interpretations are
more likely than others. For example, we can be conﬁdent that the picture doesn’t show a
real Godzilla destroying a real building, because there are no real Godzillas. Second, some
ambiguities are insigniﬁcant. For example, distant scenery may be trees or may be a ﬂat
painted surface. For most applications, the difference is unimportant, because the objects are
far away and so we will not bump into them or interact with them soon.
The two core problems of computer vision are reconstruction, where an agent builds
Reconstruction
a model of the world from an image or a set of images, and recognition, where an agent
Recognition
draws distinctions among the objects it encounters based on visual and other information.
Both problems should be interpreted very broadly. Building a geometric model from images
is obviously reconstruction (and solutions are very valuable), but sometimes we need to build
a map of the different textures on a surface, and this is reconstruction, too. Attaching names
to objects that appear in an image is clearly recognition. Sometimes we need to answer
questions like: Is it asleep? Does it eat meat? Which end has teeth? Answering these
questions is recognition, too.
The last thirty years of research have produced powerful tools and methods for addressing
these core problems. Understanding these methods requires an understanding of the processes
by which images are formed.
27.2 Image Formation
Imaging distorts the appearance of objects. A picture taken looking down a long straight set
of railway tracks will suggest that the rails converge and meet. If you hold your hand in front
of your eye, you can block out the moon, even though the moon is larger than your hand (this
works with the sun too, but you could damage your eyes checking it). If you hold a book
ﬂat in front of your face and tilt it backward and forward, it will seem to shrink and grow in
the image. This effect is known as foreshortening (Figure 27.1). Models of these effects are
essential for building competent object recognition systems and also yield powerful cues for
reconstructing geometry.
27.2.1 Images without lenses: The pinhole camera
Image sensors gather light scattered from objects in a scene and create a two-dimensional
Scene
(2D) image. In the eye, these sensors consist of two types of cell: There are about 100
Image
million rods, which are sensitive to light at a wide range of wavelengths, and 5 million cones.
Cones, which are essential for color vision, are of three main types, each of which is sensitive
to a different set of wavelengths. In cameras, the image is formed on an image plane. In ﬁlm
cameras the image plane is coated with silver halides. In digital cameras, the image plane is
subdivided into a grid of a few million pixels.
Pixels
We refer to the whole image plane as a sensor, but each pixel is an individual tiny
Sensor
sensor—usually a charge-coupled device (CCD) or complementary metal-oxide semiconduc-
tor (CMOS). Each photon arriving at the sensor produces an electrical effect, whose strength
depends on the wavelength of the photon. The output of the sensor is the sum of all these
effects in some time window, meaning that image sensors report a weighted average of the


990
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
Figure 27.1 Geometry in the scene appears distorted in images. Parallel lines appear to
meet, like the railway tracks in a desolate town. Buildings that have right angles in the real
world scene have distorted angles in the image.
intensity of light arriving at the sensor. The average is over wavelength, direction from which
photons can arrive, time, and the area of the sensor.
To see a focused image, we must ensure that all the photons arriving at a sensor come
from approximately the same spot on the object in the world. The simplest way to form a fo-
cused image is to view stationary objects with a pinhole camera, which consists of a pinhole
Pinhole camera
opening, O, at the front of a box, and an image plane at the back of the box (Figure 27.2).
The opening is called the aperture. If the pinhole is small enough, each tiny sensor in the
Aperture
image plane will see only photons that come from approximately the same spot on the object,
and so the image is focused. We can form focused images of moving objects with a pinhole
camera, too, as long as the object moves only a short distance in the sensors’ time window.
Otherwise, the image of the moving object is defocused, an effect known as motion blur.
Motion blur
One way to manipulate the time window is to open and close the pinhole.
Pinhole cameras make it easy to understand the geometric model of camera behavior
(which is more complicated—but similar—with most other imaging devices). We will use a
three-dimensional (3D) coordinate system with the origin at O, and will consider a point P
in the scene, with coordinates (X,Y,Z). P gets projected to the point P′ in the image plane
with coordinates (x,y,z). If f is the focal length—the distance from the pinhole to the image
Focal length
plane—then by similar triangles, we can derive the following equations:
−x
f
= X
Z , −y
f
= Y
Z
⇒
x = −fX
Z
, y = −fY
Z
.
These equations deﬁne an image formation process known as perspective projection. Note
Perspective
projection
that the Z in the denominator means that the farther away an object is, the smaller its image
will be. Also, note that the minus signs mean that the image is inverted, both left–right and
up–down, compared with the scene.
Perspective imaging has a number of geometric effects. Distant objects look small. Par-
allel lines converge to a point on the horizon. (Think of railway tracks, Figure 27.1.) A line
in the scene in the direction (U,V,W) and passing through the point (X0,Y0,Z0) can be de-
scribed as the set of points (X0+λU,Y0+λV,Z0+λW), with λ varying between −∞and +∞.
Different choices of (X0,Y0,Z0) yield different lines parallel to one another. The projection


Section 27.2
Image Formation
991
f
image
plane
pinhole
P
P’
Y
X
Z
Q
Figure 27.2 Each light sensitive element at the back of a pinhole camera receives light that
passes through the pinhole from a small range of directions. If the pinhole is small enough,
the result is a focused image behind the pinhole. The process of projection means that large,
distant objects look the same as smaller, nearby objects—the point P′ in the image plane
could have come from a nearby toy tower at point P or from a distant real tower at point Q.
of a point Pλ from this line onto the image plane is given by
Pλ =

f X0 +λU
Z0 +λW , f Y0 +λV
Z0 +λW

.
As λ →∞or λ →−∞, this becomes P∞= (fU/W, fV/W) if W̸ = 0. This means that two
parallel lines leaving different points in space will converge in the image—for large λ, the
image points are nearly the same, whatever the value of (X0,Y0,Z0) (again, think railway
tracks, Figure 27.1). We call P∞the vanishing point associated with the family of straight
Vanishing point
lines with direction (U,V,W). Lines with the same direction share the same vanishing point.
27.2.2 Lens systems
Pinhole cameras can focus light well, but because the pinhole is small, only a little light will
get in, and the image will be dark. Over a short period of time, only a few photons will hit
each point on the sensor, so the signal at each point will be dominated by random ﬂuctuations;
we say that a dark ﬁlm image is grainy and a dark digital image is noisy; either way, the image
is of low quality.
Enlarging the hole (the aperture) will make the image brighter by collecting more light
from a wider range of directions. However, with a larger aperture the light that hits a particular
point in the image plane will have come from multiple points in the real world scene, so the
image will be defocused. We need some way to refocus the image.
Vertebrate eyes and modern cameras use a lens system—a single piece of transparent
Lens
tissue in the eye and a system of multiple glass lens elements in a camera. In Figure 27.3 we
see that light from the tip of the candle spreads out in all directions. A camera (or an eye)
with a lens captures all the light that hits anywhere on the lens—a much larger area than a
pinhole—and focuses all that light to a single point on the image plane. Light from other parts
of the candle would similarly be gathered and focused to other points on the image plane. The
result is a brighter, less noisy, focused image.


992
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
Iris
Cornea
Fovea
Visual Axis
Optical Axis
Lens
Retina
Optic Nerve
Lens
System
Image plane
Focal plane
Depth of field
Figure 27.3 Lenses collect the light leaving a point in the scene (here, the tip of the candle
ﬂame) in a range of directions, and steer all the light to arrive at a single point on the image
plane. Points in the scene near the focal plane—within the depth of ﬁeld—will be focused
properly. In cameras, elements of the lens system move to change the focal plane, whereas
in the eye, the shape of the lens is changed by specialized muscles.
Lens systems do not focus all the light from everywhere in the real world; the lens design
restricts them to focusing light only from points that lie within a range of Z depths from the
lens. The center of this range—where focus is sharpest—is called the focal plane, and the
Focal plane
range of depths for which focus remains sharp enough is called the depth of ﬁeld. The larger
Depth of ﬁeld
the lens aperture (opening), the smaller the depth of ﬁeld.
What if you want to focus on something at a different distance? To move the focal plane,
the lens elements in a camera can move back and forth, and the lens in the eye can change
shape—but with age the eye lens tends to harden, making it less able to adjust focal distances,
and requiring many humans to augment their vision with external lens—eyeglasses.
27.2.3 Scaled orthographic projection
The geometric effects of perspective imaging aren’t always pronounced. For example, win-
dows on a building across the street look much smaller than ones right nearby, but two win-
dows that are next to each other will have about the same size even though one is slightly
farther away. We have the option to handle the windows with a simpliﬁed model called
scaled orthographic projection, rather than perspective projection. If the depth Z of all
Scaled orthographic
projection
points on an object fall within the range Z0 ±∆Z, with ∆Z ≪Z0, then the perspective scaling
factor f/Z can be approximated by a constant s = f/Z0. The equations for projection from
the scene coordinates (X,Y,Z) to the image plane become x = sX and y = sY. Foreshortening
still occurs in the scaled orthographic projection model, because it is caused by the object
tilting away from the view.


