1008
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
Box non-max
suppression
ROI pool
Neural net
feature 
stack
Crop
ROIs
Image
Box proposal
network
Non-max
suppression
Bounding box
regression
Neural net
classifier
0.9
0.7
Figure 27.13 Faster RCNN uses two networks. A picture of a young Nelson Mandela is
fed into the object detector. One network computes “objectness” scores of candidate image
boxes, called “anchor boxes,” centered at a grid point. There are nine anchor boxes (three
scales, three aspect ratios) at each grid point. For the example image, an inner green box and
an outer blue box have passed the objectness test. The second network is a feature stack that
computes a representation of the image suitable for classiﬁcation. The boxes with highest
objectness score are cut from the feature map, standardized in size with ROI pooling, and
passed to a classiﬁer. The blue box has a higher score than the green box and overlaps it, so
the green box is rejected by non-maximum suppression. Finally, bounding box regression the
blue box so that it ﬁts the face. This means that the relatively coarse sampling of locations,
scales, and aspect ratios does not weaken accuracy. Photo by Sipa/Shutterstock.
27.6 The 3D World
Images show a 2D picture of a 3D world. But this 2D picture is rich with cues about the 3D
world. One kind of cue occurs when we have multiple pictures of the same world, and can
match points between pictures. Another kind of cue is available within a single picture.
27.6.1 3D cues from multiple views
Two pictures of objects in a 3D world are better than one for several reasons:
• If you have two images of the same scene taken from different viewpoints and you know
enough about the two cameras, you can construct a 3D model—a collection of points
with their coordinates in 3 dimensions—by ﬁguring out which point in the ﬁrst view
corresponds to which point in the second view and applying some geometry. This is
true for almost all pairs of viewing directions and almost all kinds of camera.
• If you have two views of enough points, and you know which point in the ﬁrst view
corresponds to which point in the second view, you do not need to know much about


Section 27.6
The 3D World
1009
the cameras to construct a 3D model. Two views of two points gives you four x,y co-
ordinates, and you only need three coordinates to specify a point in 3D space; the extra
coordinate comes in helpful to ﬁgure out what you need to know about the cameras.
This is true for almost all pairs of viewing directions and almost all kinds of camera.
The key problem is to establish which point in the ﬁrst view corresponds to which in the
second view. Detailed descriptions of the local appearance of a point using simple texture
features (like those in section 27.3.2) are often enough to match points. For example, in a
scene of trafﬁc on a street, there might be only one green light visible in two images taken
of the scene; we can then hypothesize that these correspond to each other. The geometry of
multiple camera views is very well understood (but sadly too complicated to expound here).
The theory produces geometric constraints on which point in one image can match with which
point in the other. Other constraints can be obtained by reasoning about the smoothness of
the reconstructed surfaces.
There are two ways of getting multiple views of a scene. One is to have two cameras
or two eyes (section 27.6.2). Another is to move (section 27.6.3). If you have more than
two views, you can recover both the geometry of the world and the details of the view very
accurately. Section 27.7.3 discusses some applications for this technology.
27.6.2 Binocular stereopsis
Most vertebrates have two eyes. This is useful for redundancy in case of a lost eye, but it
helps in other ways too. Most prey have eyes on the side of the head to enable a wider ﬁeld of
vision. Predators have the eyes in the front, enabling them to use binocular stereopsis. Hold
Binocular stereopsis
both index ﬁngers up in front of your face, with one eye closed, and adjust them so the front
ﬁnger occludes the other ﬁnger in the open eye’s view. Now swap eyes; you should notice that
the ﬁngers have shifted position with respect to one another. This shifting of position from
left view to right view is known as disparity. In the right choice of coordinate system, if we
Disparity
superimpose left and right images of an object at some depth, the object shifts horizontally in
the superimposed image, and the size of the shift is the reciprocal of the depth. You can see
this in Figure 27.14, where the nearest point of the pyramid is shifted to the left in the right
image and to the right in the left image.
To measure disparity we need to solve the correspondence problem—to determine for a
point in the left image, its “partner” in the right image which results from the projection of
the same scene point. This is analogous to what is done in measuring optical ﬂow, and the
most simple-minded approaches are somewhat similar. These methods search for blocks of
left and right pixels that match, using the sum of squared differences (as in Section 27.3.3).
More sophisticated methods use more detailed texture representations of blocks of pixels (as
in Section 27.3.2). In practice, we use much more sophisticated algorithms, which exploit
additional constraints.
Assuming that we can measure disparity, how does this yield information about depth
in the scene? We will need to work out the geometrical relationship between disparity and
depth. We will consider ﬁrst the case when both the eyes (or cameras) are looking forward
with their optical axes parallel. The relationship of the right camera to the left camera is then
just a displacement along the x-axis by an amount b, the baseline. We can use the optical
Baseline
ﬂow equations from Section 27.3.3, if we think of this as resulting from a translation vector
T acting for time δt, with Tx = b/δt and Ty = Tz = 0. The horizontal and vertical disparity


1010
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
Perceived object
Right image
(a)
(b)
Left image
Disparity
Left
Right
Figure 27.14 Translating a camera parallel to the image plane causes image features to move
in the camera plane. The disparity in positions that results is a cue to depth. If we superimpose
left and right images, as in (b), we see the disparity.
are given by the optical ﬂow components, multiplied by the time step δt, H = vx δt, V = vy δt.
Carrying out the substitutions, we get the result that H = b/Z, V = 0. In other words, the
horizontal disparity is equal to the ratio of the baseline to the depth, and the vertical disparity
is zero. We can recover the depth Z given that we know b, and can measure H.
Under normal viewing conditions, humans ﬁxate; that is, there is some point in the scene
Fixate
at which the optical axes of the two eyes intersect. Figure 27.15 shows two eyes ﬁxated
at a point P0, which is at a distance Z from the midpoint of the eyes. For convenience,
we will compute the angular disparity, measured in radians. The disparity at the point of
ﬁxation P0 is zero. For some other point P in the scene that is δZ farther away, we can
compute the angular displacements of the left and right images of P, which we will call PL
and PR, respectively. If each of these is displaced by an angle δθ/2 relative to P0, then the
displacement between PL and PR, which is the disparity of P, is just δθ. From Figure 27.15,
tanθ = b/2
Z and tan(θ −δθ/2) =
b/2
Z+δZ, but for small angles, tanθ ≈θ, so
δθ/2 = b/2
Z −
b/2
Z +δZ ≈bδZ
2Z2
and, since the actual disparity is δθ, we have
disparity = bδZ
Z2
In humans, the baseline b is about 6 cm. Suppose that Z is about 100 cm and that the
smallest detectable δθ (corresponding to the size of a single pixel) is about 5 seconds of arc,
giving a δZ of 0.4 mm. For Z = 30 cm, we get the impressively small value δZ = 0.036 mm.
That is, at a distance of 30 cm, humans can discriminate depths that differ by as little as 0.036
mm, enabling us to thread needles and the like.


Section 27.6
The 3D World
1011
b
du/2
dZ
P
P0
PR
PL
Left
eye
Z
Right
eye
u
Figure 27.15 The relation between disparity and depth in stereopsis. The centers of projec-
tion of the two eyes are distance b apart, and the optical axes intersect at the ﬁxation point
P0. The point P in the scene projects to points PL and PR in the two eyes. In angular terms,
the disparity between these is δθ (the diagram shows two angles of δθ/2).
27.6.3 3D cues from a moving camera
Assume we have a camera moving in a scene. Take Figure 27.14 and label the left image
“Time t” and the right image “Time t +1”. The geometry has not changed, so all the material
from the discussion of stereopsis also applies when a camera moves. What we called disparity
in that section is now thought of as apparent motion in the image, and called optical ﬂow. This
is a source of information for both the movement of the camera and the geometry of the scene.
To understand this, we state (without proof) an equation that relates the optical ﬂow to the
viewer’s translational velocity T and the depth in the scene.
The optical ﬂow ﬁeld is a vector ﬁeld of velocities in the image, (vx(x,y),vy(x,y)). Ex-
pressions for these components, in a coordinate frame centered on the camera and assuming
a focal length of f =1, are
vx(x,y) = −Tx +xTz
Z(x,y)
and
vy(x,y) = −Ty +yTz
Z(x,y)
.
where Z(x,y) is the z-coordinate (that is, depth) of the point in the scene corresponding to the
point in the image at (x,y).
Note that both components of the optical ﬂow, vx(x,y) and vy(x,y), are zero at the point
x = Tx/Tz,y = Ty/Tz. This point is called the focus of expansion of the ﬂow ﬁeld. Suppose
Focus of expansion
we change the origin in the x–y plane to lie at the focus of expansion; then the expressions
for optical ﬂow take on a particularly simple form. Let (x′,y′) be the new coordinates deﬁned
by x′ = x−Tx/Tz, y′ = y−Ty/Tz. Then
vx(x′,y′) =
x′Tz
Z(x′,y′),
vy(x′,y′) =
y′Tz
Z(x′,y′) .
Note that there is a scale factor ambiguity here (which is why assuming a focal length of
f =1 is harmless). If the camera was moving twice as fast, and every object in the scene was
twice as big and at twice the distance to the camera, the optical ﬂow ﬁeld would be exactly
the same. But we can still extract quite useful information.


1012
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
1. Suppose you are a ﬂy trying to land on a wall and you want useful information from
the optical ﬂow ﬁeld. The optical ﬂow ﬁeld cannot tell you the distance to the wall or
the velocity to the wall, because of the scale ambiguity. But if you divide the distance
by the velocity, the scale ambiguity cancels. The result is the time to contact, given by
Z/Tz, and is very useful indeed to control the landing approach. There is considerable
experimental evidence that many different animal species exploit this cue.
2. Consider two points at depths Z1, Z2 respectively. We may not know the absolute value
of either of these, but by considering the inverse of the ratio of the optical ﬂow magni-
tudes at these points, we can determine the depth ratio Z1/Z2. This is the cue of motion
parallax, one we use when we look out of the side window of a moving car or train and
infer that the slower-moving parts of the landscape are farther away.
27.6.4 3D cues from one view
Even a single image provides a rich collection of information about the 3D world. This is
true even if the image is just a line drawing. Line drawings have fascinated vision scientists,
because people have a sense of 3D shape and layout even though the drawing seems to contain
very little information to choose from the vast collection of scenes that could produce the
same drawing. Occlusion is one key source of information: if there is evidence in the picture
that one object occludes another, then the occluding object is closer to the eye.
In images of real scenes, texture is a strong cue to 3D structure. Section 27.3.2 stated that
texture is a repetitive pattern of texels. Although the distribution of texels may be uniform on
objects in the scene—for example, pebbles on a beach—it may not be uniform in image—
the farther pebbles appear smaller than the nearer pebbles. As another example, think about
a piece of polka-dot fabric. All the dots are the same size and shape on the fabric, but in
a perspective view some dots are ellipses due to foreshortening. Modern methods exploit
these cues by learning a mapping from images to 3D structure (Section 27.7.4), rather than
reasoning directly about the underlying mathematics of texture.
Shading—variation in the intensity of light received from different portions of a surface
in a scene—is determined by the geometry of the scene and by the reﬂectance properties of
the surfaces. There is very good evidence that shading is a cue to 3D shape. The physical
argument is easy. From the physical model of section 27.2.4, we know that if a surface normal
points toward the light source, the surface is brighter, and if it points away, the surface is
darker. This argument gets more complicated if the reﬂectance of the surface isn’t known,
and the illumination ﬁeld isn’t even, but humans seem to be able to get a useful perception of
shape from shading. We know frustratingly little about algorithms to do this.
If there is a familiar object in the picture, what it looks like depends very strongly on its
pose, that is, its position and orientation with respect to the viewer. There are straightforward
Pose
algorithms for recovering pose from correspondences between points on an object and points
on a model of the object. Recovering the pose of a known object has many applications. For
instance, in an industrial manipulation task, the robot arm cannot pick up an object until the
pose is known. Robotic surgery applications depend on exactly computing the transforma-
tions between the camera’s position and the positions of the surgical tool and the patient (to
yield the transformation from the tool’s position to the patient’s position).
Spatial relations between objects are another important cue. Here is an example. All
pedestrians are about the same height, and they tend to stand on a ground plane. If we


