Section 27.7
Using Computer Vision
1023
Figure 27.26 Style transfer: The content of a photo of a cat is combined with the style of an
abstract painting to yield a new image of the cat rendered in the abstract style (right). The
painting is Wassily Kandinsky’s Lyrisches or The Lyrical (public domain); the cat is Cosmo.
Figure 27.27 GAN generated images of lung X-rays. On the left, a pair consisting of a real
X-ray and a GAN-generated X-ray. On the right, results of a test asking radiologists, given
a pair of X-rays as seen on the left, to tell which is the real X-ray. On average, they chose
correctly 61% of the time, somewhat better than chance. But they differed in their accuracy—
the chart on the right shows the error rate for 12 different radiologists; one of them had an
error rate near 0% and another had 80% errors. The size of each dot indicates the number
of images each radiologist viewed. Figure courtesy of Alex Schwing, produced by a system
described in Deshpande et al. (2019).
a radiologist would not be surprised by how often (say) pneumonia appears. The new data
set should be different, in the sense that it does not reveal personally identiﬁable information.
The new data set should be controllable, so that the frequencies of effects can be adjusted
to reﬂect the communities of interest. For example, pneumonias are more common in the
elderly than in young adults. Each of these goals is technically difﬁcult to reach, but image
data sets have been created that fool practicing radiologists some of the time (Figure 27.27).


1024
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
27.7.6 Controlling movement with vision
One of the principal uses of vision is to provide information both for manipulating objects—
picking them up, grasping them, twirling them, and so on—and for navigating while avoiding
obstacles. The ability to use vision for these purposes is present in the most primitive of
animal visual systems. In many cases, the visual system is minimal, in the sense that it
extracts from the available light ﬁeld just the information the animal needs to inform its
behavior. Quite probably, modern vision systems evolved from early, primitive organisms
that used a photosensitive spot at one end in order to orient themselves toward (or away from)
the light. We saw in Section 27.6 that ﬂies use a very simple optical ﬂow detection system to
land on walls.
Suppose that, rather than landing on walls, we want to build a self-driving car. This is
a project that places much greater demands on the perceptual system. Perception in a self-
driving car has to support the following tasks:
• Lateral control: Ensure that the vehicle remains securely within its lane or changes
lanes smoothly when required.
• Longitudinal control: Ensure that there is a safe distance to the vehicle in front.
• Obstacle avoidance: Monitor vehicles in neighboring lanes and be prepared for evasive
maneuvers. Detect pedestrians and allow them to cross safely.
• Obey trafﬁc signals: These include trafﬁc lights, stop signs, speed limit signs, and
police hand signals.
The problem for a driver (human or computer) is to generate appropriate steering, accelera-
tion, and braking actions to best accomplish these tasks.
To make good decisions, the driver should construct a model of the world and the objects
in it. Figure 27.28 shows some of the visual inferences that are necessary to build this model.
For lateral control, the driver needs to maintain a representation of the position and orientation
of the car relative to the lane. For longitudinal control, the driver needs to keep a safe distance
from the vehicle in front (which may not be easy to identify on, say, curving multilane roads).
Obstacle avoidance and following trafﬁc signals require additional inferences.
Roads were designed for humans who navigate using vision, so it should in principle be
possible to drive using vision alone. However, in practice, commercial self-driving cars use
a variety of sensors, including cameras, lidars, radars, and microphones. A lidar or radar en-
ables direct measurement of depth, which can be more accurate than the vision-only methods
of Section 27.6. Having multiple sensors increases performance in general, and is particu-
larly important in conditions of poor visibility; for example, radar can cut through fog that
blocks cameras and lidars. Microphones can detect approaching vehicles (especially ones
with sirens) before they become visible.
There has also been much research on mobile robots navigating in indoor and outdoor
environments. Applications abound, such as the last mile of package or pizza delivery. Tra-
ditional approaches break this task up into two stages as shown in Figure 27.29:
• Map building: Simultaneous Localization and Mapping or SLAM (see page 942) is
the task of constructing a 3D model of the world, including the location of the robot in
the world (or more speciﬁcally, the location of each of the robot’s cameras). This model
(typically represented as a point cloud of obstacles) can be built from a series of images
from different camera positions.


Section 27.7
Using Computer Vision
1025
Figure 27.28 Mobileye’s camera-based sensing for autonomous vehicles. Top row: Two
images from a front-facing camera, taken a few seconds apart. The green area is the free
space—the area to which the vehicle could physically move in the immediate future. Objects
are displayed with 3D bounding boxes deﬁning their sides (red for the rear, blue for the right
side, yellow for the left side, and green for the front). Objects include vehicles, pedestrians,
the inner edge of the self-lane marks (necessary for lateral control), other painted road and
crosswalk marks, trafﬁc signs, and trafﬁc lights. Not shown are animals, poles and cones,
sidewalks, railings, and general objects (e.g., a couch that fell from the back of a truck). Each
object is then marked with a 3D position and velocity. Bottom row: A full physical model of
the environment, rendered from the detected objects. (Images show Mobileye’s vision-only
system results). Images courtesy of Mobileye.
• Path planning: Once the robot has access to this 3D map and can localize itself in it,
the objective becomes one of ﬁnding a collision-free trajectory from the current position
to the goal location (see Section 26.6).
Many variants of this general approach have been explored. For instance, in the cognitive
mapping and planning approach, the two stages of map building and path planning are two
modules in a neural network that is trained end-to-end to minimize a loss function. Such a
system does not have to build a complete map—which is often redundant and unnecessary—
if all you need is enough information to navigate from point A to point B without colliding
with obstacles.


1026
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
Action to 
Execute
Goal (3m, 4m)
Mapper
Planner
Action to 
Execute
Ego-motion
Mapper
Planner
Belief about the world
Figure 27.29 Navigation is tackled by decomposition into two problems: mapping and plan-
ning. With each successive time step, information from sensors is used to incrementally build
an uncertain model of the world. This model along with the goal speciﬁcation is passed to
a planner that outputs the next action that the robot should take in order to achieve the goal.
Models of the world can be purely geometric (as in classical SLAM), or semantic (as ob-
tained via learning), or even topological (based on landmarks). The actual robot appears on
the right. Figures courtesy of Saurabh Gupta.
Summary
Although perception appears to be an effortless activity for humans, it requires a signiﬁcant
amount of sophisticated computation. The goal of vision is to extract information needed for
tasks such as manipulation, navigation, and object recognition.
• The geometry and optics of image formation is well understood. Given a description of
a 3D scene, we can easily produce a picture of it from some arbitrary camera position—
this is the graphics problem. The inverse problem, the computer vision problem—
taking a picture and turning it into a 3D description—is more difﬁcult.
• Representations of images capture edges, texture, optical ﬂow, and regions. These yield
cues to the boundaries of objects and to correspondence between images.
• Convolutional neural networks produce accurate image classiﬁers that use learned fea-
tures. Rather roughly, the features are patterns of patterns of patterns.... It is hard to
predict when these classiﬁers will work well, because the test data may be unlike the
training data in some important way. Experience teaches that they are often accurate
enough to use in practice.
• Image classiﬁers can be turned into object detectors. One classiﬁer scores boxes in an
image for objectness; another then decides whether an object is in the box, and what
object it is. Object detection methods aren’t perfect, but are usable for a wide variety of
applications.
• With more than one view of a scene, it is possible to recover the 3D structure of the
scene and the relationship between views. In many cases, it is possible to recover 3D
geometry from a single view.
• The methods of computer vision are being very widely applied.


Bibliographical and Historical Notes
1027
Bibliographical and Historical Notes
This chapter has concentrated on vision, but other perceptual channels have been studied and
put to use in robotics. For auditory perception (hearing), we have already covered speech
recognition, and there has also been considerable work on music perception (Koelsch and
Siebel, 2005) and machine learning of music (Engel et al., 2017) as well as on machine
learning for sounds in general (Sharan and Moir, 2016).
Tactile perception or touch (Luo et al., 2017) is important in robotics and is discussed in
Chapter 26. Automated olfactory perception (smell) has seen less work, but it has been shown
that deep learning models can learn to predict smells based on the structure of molecules
(Sanchez-Lengeling et al., 2019).
Systematic attempts to understand human vision can be traced back to ancient times.
Euclid (ca. 300 BCE) wrote about natural perspective—the mapping that associates, with
each point P in the three-dimensional world, the direction of the ray OP joining the center
of projection O to the point P. He was well aware of the notion of motion parallax. Ancient
Roman paintings, such as the ones perserved by the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 CE, used an
informal kind of perspective, with more than one horizon line.
The mathematical understanding of perspective projection, this time in the context of
projection onto planar surfaces, had its next signiﬁcant advance in the 15th century in Re-
naissance Italy. Brunelleschi is usually credited with creating the ﬁrst paintings based on
geometrically correct projection of a three-dimensional scene in about 1413. In 1435, Alberti
codiﬁed the rules and inspired generations of artists. Particularly notable in their develop-
ment of the science of perspective, as it was called in those days, were Leonardo da Vinci and
Albrecht D¨urer. Leonardo’s late 15th-century descriptions of the interplay of light and shade
(chiaroscuro), umbra and penumbra regions of shadows, and aerial perspective are still worth
reading in translation (Kemp, 1989).
Although perspective was known to the Greeks, they were curiously confused by the role
of the eyes in vision. Aristotle thought of the eyes as devices emitting rays, rather in the
manner of modern laser range ﬁnders. This mistaken view was laid to rest by the work of
Arab scientists, such as Alhazen, in the 10th century.
The development of various kinds of cameras followed. These consisted of rooms (cam-
era is Latin for “chamber”) where light would be let in through a small hole in one wall to
cast an image of the scene outside on the opposite wall. Of course, in all these cameras, the
image was inverted, which caused no end of confusion. If the eye was to be thought of as
such an imaging device, how do we see right side up? This enigma exercised the greatest
minds of the era (including Leonardo). It took the work of Kepler and Descartes to settle the
question. Descartes placed an eye from which the opaque cuticle had been removed in a hole
in a window shutter. The result was an inverted image formed on a piece of paper laid out
on the retina. Although the retinal image is indeed inverted, this does not cause a problem
because the brain interprets the image the right way. In modern jargon, one just has to access
the data structure appropriately.
The next major advances in the understanding of vision took place in the 19th century.
The work of Helmholtz and Wundt, described in Chapter 1, established psychophysical ex-
perimentation as a rigorous scientiﬁc discipline. Through the work of Young, Maxwell, and
Helmholtz, a trichromatic theory of color vision was established. The fact that humans can


