Section 27.2
Image Formation
993
27.2.4 Light and shading
The brightness of a pixel in the image is a function of the brightness of the surface patch in
the scene that projects to the pixel. For modern cameras, this function is linear for middling
intensities of light, but has pronounced nonlinearities for darker and brighter illumination. We
will use a linear model. Image brightness is a strong, if ambiguous, cue to both the shape and
the identity of objects. The ambiguity occurs because there are three factors that contribute
to the amount of light that comes from a point on an object to the image: the overall intensity
of ambient light); whether the point is facing the light or is in shadow); and the amount of
Ambient light
light reﬂected from the point.
Reﬂection
People are surprisingly good at disambiguating brightness—they usually can tell the dif-
ference between a black object in bright light and a white object in shadow, even if both have
the same overall brightness. However, people sometimes get shading and markings mixed
up—-a streak of dark makeup under a cheekbone will often look like a shading effect, mak-
ing the face look thinner.
Most surfaces reﬂect light by a process of diffuse reﬂection. Diffuse reﬂection scatters
Diﬀuse reﬂection
light evenly across the directions leaving a surface, so the brightness of a diffuse surface
doesn’t depend on the viewing direction. Most cloth has this property, as do most paints,
rough wooden surfaces, most vegetation, and rough stone or concrete.
Specular reﬂection causes incoming light to leave a surface in a lobe of directions that
Specular reﬂection
is determined by the direction the light arrived from. A mirror is one example. What you see
depends on the direction in which you look at the mirror. In this case, the lobe of directions
is very narrow, which is why you can resolve different objects in a mirror.
For many surfaces, the lobe is broader. These surfaces display small bright patches,
usually called specularities. As the surface or the light moves, the specularities move, too.
Specularities
Away from these patches, the surface behaves as if it is diffuse. Specularities are often seen on
metal surfaces, painted surfaces, plastic surfaces, and wet surfaces. These are easy to identify,
because they are small and bright (Figure 27.4). For almost all purposes, it is enough to model
all surfaces as being diffuse with specularities.
The main source of illumination outside is the sun, whose rays all travel parallel to one
another in a known direction because it is so far away. We model this behavior with a distant
point light source. This is the most important model of lighting, and is quite effective for
Distant point light
source
indoor scenes as well as outdoor scenes. The amount of light collected by a surface patch in
this model depends on the angle θ between the illumination direction and the normal (per-
pendicular) to the surfaces (Figure 27.5).
A diffuse surface patch illuminated by this model will reﬂect some fraction of the light it
collects, given by the diffuse albedo. For practical surfaces, this lies in the range 0.05-0.95.
Diﬀuse albedo
Lambert’s cosine law states the brightness of a diffuse patch is given by
Lambert’s cosine law
I = ρI0 cosθ,
where I0 is the intensity of the light source, θ is the angle between the light source direction
and the surface normal, and ρ is the diffuse albedo. This law predicts that bright image pixels
come from surface patches that face the light directly and dark pixels come from patches
that see the light only tangentially, so that the shading on a surface provides some shape
information. If the surface cannot see the source, then it is in shadow. Shadows are very
Shadow
seldom a uniform black, because the shadowed surface usually receives some light from


994
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
Specularities
Cast shadow
Diffuse reflection, dark
Diffuse reflection, bright
Figure 27.4 This photograph illustrates a variety of illumination effects. There are specular-
ities on the stainless steel cruet. The onions and carrots are bright diffuse surfaces because
they face the light direction. The shadows appear at surface points that cannot see the light
source at all. Inside the pot are some dark diffuse surfaces where the light strikes at a tangen-
tial angle. (There are also some shadows inside the pot.) Photo by Ryman Cabannes/Image
Professionals GmbH/Alamy Stock Photo.
A
B
u
u
Figure 27.5 Two surface patches are illuminated by a distant point source, whose rays are
shown as light arrows. Patch A is tilted away from the source (θ is close to 90◦) and collects
less energy, because it cuts fewer light rays per unit surface area. Patch B, facing the source
(θ is close to 0◦), collects more energy.
other sources. Outdoors, the most important source other than the sun is the sky, which
is quite bright. Indoors, light reﬂected from other surfaces illuminates shadowed patches.
These interreﬂections can have a signiﬁcant effect on the brightness of other surfaces, too.
Interreﬂections
These effects are sometimes modeled by adding a constant ambient illumination term to the
Ambient illumination
predicted intensity.


Section 27.3
Simple Image Features
995
27.2.5 Color
Fruit is a bribe that a tree offers to animals to carry its seeds around. Trees that can signal
when this bribe is ready have an advantage, as do animals that can read these signals. As a
result, most fruits start green, and turn red or yellow when ripe, and most fruit-eating animals
can see these color changes. Generally, light arriving at the eye has different amounts of
energy at different wavelengths, and is represented by a spectral energy density.
Cameras and the human vision system respond to light at wavelengths ranging from about
380nm (violet) to about 750nm (red). In color imaging systems, there are different types of
receptor that respond more or less strongly to different wavelengths. In humans, the sensation
of color occurs when the vision system compares the responses of receptors near each other
on the retina. Animal color vision systems typically have relatively few types of receptor,
and so represent relatively little of the detail in the spectral energy density function (some
animals have only one type of receptor; some have as many as six types). Human color
vision is produced by three types of receptor. Most color camera systems use only three types
of receptor, too, because the images are produced for humans, but some specialized systems
can produce very detailed measurements of the spectral energy density.
Because most humans have three types of color-sensitive receptors, the principle of
trichromacy applies. This idea, ﬁrst proposed by Thomas Young in 1802, states that a human
Principle of
trichromacy
observer can match the visual appearance of any spectral energy density, however complex,
by mixing appropriate amounts of just three primaries. Primaries are colored light sources,
Primaries
chosen so that no mixture of any two will match the third. A common choice is to have one
red primary, one green, and one blue, abbreviated as RGB. Although a given colored object
RGB
may have many component frequencies of light, we can match the color by mixing just the
three primaries, and most people will agree on the proportions of the mixture. That means
we can represent color images with just three numbers per pixel—the RGB values.
For most computer vision applications, it is accurate enough to model a surface as having
three different (RGB) diffuse albedos and to model light sources as having three (RGB) in-
tensities. We then apply Lambert’s cosine law to each to get red, green, and blue pixel values.
This model predicts, correctly, that the same surface will produce different colored image
patches under different colored lights. In fact, human observers are quite good at ignoring
the effects of different colored lights and appear to estimate the color the surface would have
under white light, an effect known as color constancy.
Color constancy
27.3 Simple Image Features
Light reﬂects off objects in the scene to form an image consisting of, say, twelve million
three-byte pixels. As with all sensors there will be noise in the image, and in any case there is
a lot of data to deal with. The way to get started analyzing this data is to produce simpliﬁed
representations that expose what’s important, but reduce detail. Much current practice learns
these representations from data. But there are four properties of images and video that are
particularly general: edges, texture, optical ﬂow and segmentation into regions.
An edge occurs where there is a big difference in pixel intensity across part of an image.
Building representations of edges involves local operations on an image—you need to com-
pare a pixel value to some values nearby—and doesn’t require any knowledge about what is


996
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
1
2
4
2
1
1
3
Figure 27.6 Different kinds of edges: (1) depth discontinuities; (2) surface orientation dis-
continuities; (3) reﬂectance discontinuities; (4) illumination discontinuities (shadows).
in the image. Thus, edge detection can come early in the pipeline of operations and we call it
an “early” or “low-level” operation.
The other operations require handling a larger area of the image. For example, a texture
description applies to a pool of pixels—to say “stripey,” you need to see some stripes. Optical
ﬂow represents where pixels move to from one image in a sequence to the next, and this
can cover a larger area. Segmentation cuts an image into regions of pixels that naturally
belong together, and doing so requires looking at the whole region. Operations like this are
sometimes referred to as “mid-level” operations.
27.3.1 Edges
Edges are straight lines or curves in the image plane across which there is a “signiﬁcant”
Edges
change in image brightness. The goal of edge detection is to abstract away from the messy,
multi-megabyte image and towards a more compact, abstract representation, as in Figure 27.6.
Effects in the scene very often result in large changes in image intensity, and so produce edges
in the image. Depth discontinuities (labeled 1 in the ﬁgure) can cause edges because when
you cross the discontinuity, the color typically changes. When the surface normal changes
(labeled 2 in the ﬁgure), the image intensity often changes. When the surface reﬂectance
changes (labeled 3), the image intensity often changes. Finally, a shadow (labeled 4) is a
discontinuity in illumination that causes an edge in the image, even though there is not an
edge in the object. Edge detectors can’t disentangle the cause of the discontinuity, which is
left to later processing.
Finding edges requires care. Figure 27.7 (top) shows a one-dimensional crosssection of
an image perpendicular to an edge, with an edge at x = 50.
You might differentiate the image and look for places where the magnitude of the deriva-
tive I′(x) is large. This almost works, but in Figure 27.7 (middle), we see that although there
is a peak at x=50, there are also subsidiary peaks at other locations (e.g., x=75) that could be
mistaken for true edges. These arise because of the presence of “noise” in the image. Noise
Noise
here means changes to the value of a pixel that don’t have to do with an edge. For example,


Section 27.3
Simple Image Features
997
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
−1
0
1
2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
−1
0
1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
−1
0
1
Figure 27.7 Top: Intensity proﬁle I(x) along a one-dimensional section across a step edge.
Middle: The derivative of intensity, I′(x). Large values of this function correspond to edges,
but the function is noisy. Bottom: The derivative of a smoothed version of the intensity. The
noisy candidate edge at x=75 has disappeared.
there could be thermal noise in the camera; there could be scratches on the object surface that
change the surface normal at the ﬁnest scale; there could be minor variations in the surface
albedo; and so on. Each of these effects make the gradient look big, but don’t mean that an
edge is present. If we “smooth” the image ﬁrst, the spurious peaks are diminished, as we see
in Figure 27.7 (bottom).
Smoothing involves using surrounding pixels to suppress noise. We will predict the “true”
value of our pixel as a weighted sum of nearby pixels, with more weight for the closest pixels.
A natural choice of weights is a Gaussian ﬁlter. Recall that the zero-mean Gaussian function
Gaussian ﬁlter
with standard deviation σ is
Gσ(x) =
1
√
2πσe−x2/2σ2
in one dimension, or
Gσ(x,y) =
1
2πσ2 e−(x2+y2)/2σ2 in two dimensions.
Applying a Gaussian ﬁlter means replacing the intensity I(x0,y0) with the sum, over all (x,y)
pixels, of I(x,y)Gσ(d), where d is the distance from (x0,y0) to (x,y). This kind of weighted
sum is so common that there is a special name and notation for it. We say that the function h
is the convolution of two functions f and g (denoted as h = f ∗g) if we have
Convolution
h(x) =
+∞
∑
u=−∞
f(u)g(x−u)
in one dimension, or
h(x,y) =
+∞
∑
u=−∞
+∞
∑
v=−∞
f(u,v)g(x−u,y−v)
in two dimensions.


