1018
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
27.7.3 Reconstruction from many views
Reconstructing a set of points from many views—which could come from video or from an
aggregation of tourist photographs—is similar to reconstructing the points from two views,
but there are some important differences. There is far more work to be done to establish cor-
respondence between points in different views, and points can go in and out of view, making
the matching and reconstruction process messier. But more views means more constraints
on the reconstruction and on the recovered viewing parameters, so it is usually possible to
produce extremely accurate estimates of both the position of the points and of the viewing
parameters. Rather roughly, reconstruction proceeds by matching points over pairs of im-
ages, extending these matches to groups of images, coming up with a rough solution for both
geometry and viewing parameters, then polishing that solution. Polishing means minimizing
the error between points predicted by the model (of geometry and viewing parameters) and
the locations of image features. The detailed procedures are too complex to cover fully, but
are now very well understood and quite reliable.
All the geometric constraints on correspondences are known for any conceivably useful
form of camera. The procedures can be generalized to deal with views that are not ortho-
graphic; to deal with points that are observed in only some views; to deal with unknown
camera parameters (like focal length); and to exploit various sophisticated searches for ap-
propriate correspondences. It is practical to accurately reconstruct a model of an entire city
from images. Some applications are:
• Model building: For example, one might build a modeling system that takes many
views depicting an object and produces a very detailed 3D mesh of textured polygons
for use in computer graphics and virtual reality applications. It is routine to build models
like this from video, but such models can now be built from apparently random sets of
pictures. For example, you can build a 3D model of the Statue of Liberty from pictures
found on the Internet.
• Mix animation with live actors in video: To place computer graphics characters into
real video, we need to know how the camera moved for the real video, so we can render
the character correctly, changing the view as the camera moves.
• Path reconstruction: Mobile robots need to know where they have been. If the robot
has a camera, we can build a model of the camera’s path through the world; that will
serve as a representation of the robot’s path.
• Construction management: Buildings are enormously complicated artifacts, and keep-
ing track of what is happening during construction is difﬁcult and expensive. One way
to keep track is to ﬂy drones through the construction site once a week, ﬁlming the
current state. Then build a 3D model of the current state and explore the difference
between the plans and the reconstruction using visualization techniques. Figure 27.21
illustrates this application.
27.7.4 Geometry from a single view
Geometric representations are particularly useful if you want to move, because they can reveal
where you are, where you can go, and what you are likely bump into. But it is not always
convenient to use multiple views to produce a geometric model. For example, when you open
the door and step into a room, your eyes are too close together to recover a good representation


Section 27.7
Using Computer Vision
1019
Figure 27.21 3D models of construction sites are produced from images by structure-from-
motion and multiview stereo algorithms. They help construction companies to coordinate
work on large buildings by comparing a 3D model of the actual construction to date with
the building plans. Left: A visualization of a geometric model captured by drones. The
reconstructed 3D points are rendered in color, so the result looks like progress to date (note
the partially completed building with crane). The small pyramids show the pose of a drone
when it captured an image, to allow visualization of the ﬂight path. Right: These systems
are actually used by construction teams; this team views the model of the as-built site, and
compares it with building plans as part of the coordination meeting. Figure courtesy of Derek
Hoiem, Mani Golparvar-Fard and Reconstruct, produced by a commercial system described
in a blog post at medium.com/reconstruct-inc.
of the depth to distant objects across the room. You could move your head back and forth,
but that is time-consuming and inconvenient.
An alternative is to predict a depth map—an array giving the depth to each pixel in the
Depth map
image, nominally from the camera—from a single image. For many kinds of scenes, this is
surprisingly easy to do accurately, because the depth map has quite a simple structure. This is
particularly true of rooms and indoor scenes in general. The mechanics are straightforward.
One obtains a data set of images and depth maps, then trains a network to predict depth
maps from images. A variety of interesting variations of the problem can be solved. The
problem with a depth map is that it doesn’t tell you anything about the backs of objects, or
the space behind the objects. But there are methods that can predict what voxels (3D pixels)
are occupied by known objects (the object geometry is known) and what a depth map would
look like if an object were removed (and so where you could hide objects). These methods
work because object shapes are quite strongly stylized.
As we saw in Section 27.6.4, recovering the pose of a known object using a 3D model
is straightforward. Now imagine you see a single image of, say, a sparrow. If you have seen
many images of sparrow-like birds in the past, you can reconstruct a reasonable estimate of
both the pose of the sparrow and its geometric model from that single image. Using the past
images you build a small, parametric family of geometric models for sparrow-like birds; then
an optimization procedure is used to ﬁnd the best set of parameters and viewpoints to explain
the image that you see. This argument works to supply texture for that model, too, even for
the parts you cannot see (Figure 27.22).


1020
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
Figure 27.22 If you have seen many pictures of some category—say, birds (top)—you can
use them to produce a 3D reconstruction from a single new view (bottom). You need to be
sure that all objects have a fairly similar geometry (so a picture of an ostrich won’t help if
you’re looking at a sparrow), but classiﬁcation methods can sort this out. From the many
images you can estimate how texture values in the image are distributed across the object,
and thus complete the texture for parts of the bird you haven’t seen yet (bottom). Figure
courtesy of Angjoo Kanazawa, produced by a system described in Kanazawa et al. (2018b).
Top photo credit: Satori/123RF; Bottom left credit: Four Oaks/Shutterstock.
27.7.5 Making pictures
It is now common to insert computer graphics models into photographs in a convincing fash-
ion, as in Figure 27.23, where a statue has been placed into a photo of a room. First estimate
a depth map and albedo for the picture. Then estimate the lighting in the image by matching
it to other images with known lighting. Place the object in the image’s depth map, and render
the resulting world with a physical rendering program—a standard tool in computer graphics.
Finally, blend the modiﬁed image with the original image.
Neural networks can also be trained to do image transformation: mapping images from
Image
transformation
type X—for example, a blurry image; an aerial image of a town; or a drawing of a new
product—to images of type Y—for example, a deblurred version of the image; a road map;
or a product photograph. This is easiest when the training data consists of (X, Y) pairs of
images—in Figure 27.24 each example pair has an aerial image and the corresponding road
map section. The training loss compares the output of the network with the desired output,
and also has a loss component from a generative adversarial network (GAN) that ensures that
the output has the right kinds of features for images of type Y. As we see in the test portion
of Figure 27.24, systems of this kind perform very well.
Sometimes we don’t have images that are paired with each other, but we do have a big
collection of images of type X (say, pictures of horses) and a separate collection of type Y


Section 27.7
Using Computer Vision
1021
Figure 27.23 On the left, an image of a real scene. On the right, a computer graphics object
has been inserted into the scene. You can see that the light appears to be coming from the
right direction, and that the object seems to cast appropriate shadows. The generated image
is convincing even if there are small errors in the lighting and shadows, because people are
not expert at identifying these errors. Figure courtesy of Kevin Karsch, produced by a system
described in Karsch et al. (2011).
xi
yi
…
Training data
Input
i
xi
X
Y
regression error
xi
yi
yi
Objective
Result
Training
Test
,
,
y^
^
Figure 27.24 Paired image translation where the input consists of aerial images and the
corresponding map tiles, and the goal is to train a network to produce a map tile from an
aerial image. (The system can also learn to generate aerial images from map tiles.) The
network is trained by comparing ˆyi (the output for example xi of type X) to the right output yi
of type Y. Then at test time, the network must make new images of type Y from new inputs
of type X. Figure courtesy of Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu and Alexei A. Efros, produced by a
system described in Isola et al. (2017). Map data © 2019 Google.
(say, pictures of zebras). Imagine an artist who is tasked with creating an image of a zebra
running in a ﬁeld. The artist would appreciate being able to select just the right image of
a horse, and then having the computer automatically transform the horse into a zebra (Fig-
ure 27.25). To achieve this we can train two transformation networks, with an additional
constraint called a cycle constraint. The ﬁrst network maps horses to zebras; the second net-
work maps zebras to horses; and the cycle constraint requires that when you map X to Y to


1022
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
i
cycle-consistency error
X
Y
yi
ˆxi
xi
Objective
Result
xi
…
Y
…
Training data
Input
Training
Test
,
yˆ
ˆ
X
Figure 27.25 Unpaired image translation: given two populations of images (here type X is
horses and type Y is zebras), but no corresponding pairs, learn to translate a horse into a
zebra. The method trains two predictors: one that maps type X to type Y, and another that
maps type Y to type X. If the ﬁrst network maps a horse xi to a zebra ˆyi, the second network
should map ˆyi back to the original xi. The difference between xi and ˆxi is what trains the two
networks. The cycle from Y to X and back must be closed. Such networks can successfully
impose rich transformations on images. Figure courtesy of Alexei A. Efros; see Zhu et al.
(2017). Running horse photo by Justyna Furmanczyk Gibaszek/Shutterstock.
X (or Y to X to Y), you get what you started with. Again, GAN losses ensure that the horse
(or zebra) pictures that the networks output are “like” real horse (or zebra) pictures.
Another artistic effect is called style transfer: the input consists of two images—the
Style transfer
content (for example, a photograph of a cat); and the style (for example, an abstract painting).
The output is a version of the cat rendered in the abstract style (see Figure 27.26). The key
insight to solving this problem is that if we examine a deep convolutional neural network
(CNN) that has been trained to do object recognition (say, on ImageNet), we ﬁnd that the
early layers tend to represent the style of a picture, and the late layers represent the content.
Let p be the content image and s be the style image, and let E(x) be the vector of activations
of an early layer on image x and L(x) be the vector of activations of a late layer on image
x. Then we want to generate some image x that has similar content to the house photo,
that is, minimizes |L(x)−L(p)|, and also has similar style to the impressionist painting, that
is, minimizes |E(x) −E(s)|. We use gradient descent with a loss function that is a linear
combination of these two factors to ﬁnd an image x that minimizes the loss.
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) can create novel photorealistic images, fooling
most people most of the time. One kind of image is the deepfake—an image or video that
Deepfake
looks like a particular person, but is generated from a model. For example, when Carrie Fisher
was 60, a generated replica of her 19-year-old face was superimposed on another actor’s body
for the making of Rogue One. The movie industry creates ever-better deepfakes for artistic
purposes, and researchers work on countermeasures for detecting deepfakes, to mitigate the
destructive effects of fake news.
Generated images can also be used to maintain privacy. For example, there are image
data sets in radiological practices that would be useful for researchers, but can’t be published
because of patient conﬁdentiality. Generative image models can take a private data set of
images and produce a synthetic data set that can be shared with researchers. This data set
should be (a) like the training data set; (b) different; and (c) controllable. Consider chest
X-rays. The synthetic data set should be like the training data set in the sense that each image
individually would fool a radiologist and the frequencies of each effect should be right, so


