Section 27.7
Using Computer Vision
1013
know where the horizon is in an image, we can rank pedestrians by distance to the camera.
This works because we know where their feet are, and pedestrians whose feet are closer to
the horizon in the image are farther away from the camera, and so must be smaller in the
image. This means we can rule out some detector responses—if a detector ﬁnds a pedestrian
who is large in the image and whose feet are close to the horizon, it has found an enormous
pedestrian; these don’t exist, so the detector is wrong. In turn, a reasonably reliable pedestrian
detector is capable of producing estimates of the horizon, if there are several pedestrians in
the scene at different distances from the camera. This is because the relative scaling of the
pedestrians is a cue to where the horizon is. So we can extract a horizon estimate from the
detector, then use this estimate to prune the pedestrian detector’s mistakes.
27.7 Using Computer Vision
Here we survey a range of computer vision applications. There are now many reliable com-
puter vision tools and toolkits, so the range of applications that are successful and useful is
extraordinary. Many are developed at home by enthusiasts for special purposes, which is
testimony to how usable the methods are and how much impact they have. (For example, an
enthusiast created a great object-detection-based pet door that refuses entry to a cat if it is
bringing in a dead mouse–a Web search will ﬁnd it for you).
27.7.1 Understanding what people are doing
If we could build systems that understood what people are doing by analyzing video, we could
build human-computer interfaces that watch people and react to their behavior. With these
interfaces, we could: design buildings and public places better, by collecting and using data
about what people do in public; build more accurate and less intrusive security surveillance
systems; build automated sports commentators; make construction sites and workplaces safer
by generating warnings when people and machines get dangerously close; build computer
games that make a player get up and move around; and save energy by managing heat and
light in a building to match where the occupants are and what they are doing.
The state of the art for some problems is now extremely strong. There are methods that
can predict the locations of a person’s joints in an image very accurately. Quite good estimates
of the 3D conﬁguration of that person’s body follow (see Figure 27.16). This works because
pictures of the body tend to have weak perspective effects, and body segments don’t vary
much in length, so the foreshortening of a body segment in an image is a good cue to the
angle between it and the camera plane. With a depth sensor, these estimates can be made fast
enough to build them into computer game interfaces.
Classifying what people are doing is harder. Video that shows rather structured behaviors,
like ballet, gymnastics, or tai chi, where there are quite speciﬁc vocabularies that refer to very
precisely delineated activities on simple backgrounds, is quite easy to deal with. Good results
can be obtained with a lot of labeled data and an appropriate convolutional neural network.
However, it can be difﬁcult to prove that the methods actually work, because they rely so
strongly on context. For example, a classiﬁer that labels “swimming” sequences very well
might just be a swimming pool detector, which wouldn’t work for (say) swimmers in rivers.
More general problems remain open—for example, how to link observations of the body
and the objects nearby to the goals and intentions of the moving people. One source of


1014
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
Figure 27.16 Reconstructing humans from a single image is now practical. Each row shows
a reconstruction of 3D body shape obtained using a single image. These reconstructions are
possible because methods can estimate the location of joints, the joint angles in 3D, the shape
of the body, and the pose of the body with respect to an image. Each row shows the follow-
ing: far left a picture; center left the picture with the reconstructed body superimposed;
center right another view of the reconstructed body; and far right yet another view of the
reconstructed body. The different views of the body make it much harder to conceal errors
in reconstruction. Figure courtesy of Angjoo Kanazawa, produced by a system described in
Kanazawa et al. (2018a).
difﬁculty is that similar behaviors look different, and different behaviors look similar, as
Figure 27.17 shows.
Another difﬁculty is caused by time scale. What someone is doing depends quite strongly
on the time scale, as Figure 27.18 illustrates. Another important effect shown in that ﬁgure
is that behavior composes—several recognized behaviors may be combined to form a single
higher-level behavior such as ﬁxing a snack.
It may also be that unrelated behaviors are going on at the same time, such as singing a
song while ﬁxing a snack. A challenge is that we don’t have a common vocabulary for the
pieces of behavior. People tend to think they know a lot of behavior names but can’t produce
long lists of such words on demand. That makes it harder to get data sets of consistently
labeled behaviors.
Learned classiﬁers are guaranteed to behave well only if the training and test data come
from the same distribution. We have no way of checking that this constraint applies to images,
but empirically we observe that image classiﬁers and object detectors work very well. But for
activity data, the relationship between training and test data is more untrustworthy because


Section 27.7
Using Computer Vision
1015
Open fridge
Take something 
out of fridge
Figure 27.17 The same action can look very different; and different actions can look similar.
These examples show actions taken from a data set of natural behaviors; the labels are chosen
by the curators of the data set, rather than predicted by an algorithm. Top: examples of the
label “opening fridge,” some shown in closeup and some from afar. Bottom: examples of
the label “take something out of fridge.” Notice how in both rows the subject’s hand is close
to the fridge door—telling the difference between the cases requires quite subtle judgment
about where the hand is and where the door is. Figure courtesy of David Fouhey, taken from
a data set described in Fouhey et al. (2018).
Timeline
Figure 27.18 What you call an action depends on the time scale. The single frame at the
top is best described as opening the fridge (you don’t gaze at the contents when you close a
fridge). But if you look at a short clip of video (indicated by the frames in the center row),
the action is best described as getting milk from the fridge. If you look at a long clip (the
frames in the bottom row), the action is best described as ﬁxing a snack. Notice that this
illustrates one way in which behavior composes: getting milk from the fridge is sometimes
part of ﬁxing a snack, and opening the fridge is usually part of getting milk from the fridge.
Figure courtesy of David Fouhey, taken from a data set described in Fouhey et al. (2018).


1016
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
A baby eating a piece
of food in his mouth
A young boy eating
a piece of cake
A small bird is perched
on a branch
A small brown bear is
sitting in the grass
Figure 27.19 Automated image captioning systems produce some good results and some
failures. The two captions at left describe the respective images well, although “eating ...in
his mouth” is a disﬂuency that is fairly typical of the recurrent neural network language mod-
els used by early captioning systems. For the two captions on the right, the captioning system
seems not to know about squirrels, and so guesses the animal from context; it also fails to
recognize that the two squirrels are eating. Image credits: geraine/Shutterstock; ESB Pro-
fessional/Shutterstock; BushAlex/Shutterstock; Maria.Tem/Shutterstock. The images shown
are similar but not identical to the original images from which the captions were generated.
For the original images see Aneja et al. (2018).
people do so many things in so many contexts. For example, suppose we have a pedestrian
detector that performs well on a large data set. There will be rare phenomena (for example,
people mounting unicycles) that do not appear in the training set, so we can’t say for sure
how the detector will work in such cases. The challenge is to prove that the detector is safe
whatever pedestrians do, which is difﬁcult for current theories of learning.
27.7.2 Linking pictures and words
Many people create and share pictures and videos on the Internet. The difﬁculty is ﬁnding
what you want. Typically, people want to search using words (rather than, say, example
sketches). Because most pictures don’t come with words attached, it is natural to try and
build tagging systems that tag images with relevant words. The underlying machinery is
Tagging system
straightforward—we apply image classiﬁcation and object detection methods and tag the im-
age with the output words. But tags aren’t a comprehensive description of what is happening
in an image. It matters who is doing what, and tags don’t capture this. For example, tagging
a picture of a cat in the street with the object categories “cat”, “street”, “trash can” and “ﬁsh
bones” leaves out the information that the cat is pulling the ﬁsh bones out of an open trash
can on the street.
As an alternative to tagging, we might build captioning systems—systems that write a
Captioning systems
caption of one or more sentences describing the image. The underlying machinery is again
straightforward—couple a convolutional network (to represent the image) to a recurrent neu-
ral network or transformer network (to generate sentences), and train the result with a data set
of captioned images. There are many images with captions available on the Internet; curated
data sets use human labor to augment each image with additional captions to capture the vari-
ation in natural language. For example, the COCO (Common Objects in Context) data set is
a comprehensive collection of over 200,000 images labeled with ﬁve captions per image.
Current methods for captioning use detectors to ﬁnd a set of words that describe the
image, and provide those words to a sequence model that is trained to generate a sentence.


Section 27.7
Using Computer Vision
1017
Q. What is the cat wearing?
A. Hat
Q. What is the weather like?
A. Rainy
Q. What surface is this?
A. Clay
Q. What toppings are on the pizza?
A. Mushrooms
Q. How many holes are in the pizza?
A. 8
Q. What letter is on the racket?
A. w
Q. What color is the right front leg?
A. Brown
Q. Why is the sign bent?
A. It’s not
Figure 27.20 Visual question-answering systems produce answers (typically chosen from a
multiple-choice set) to natural-language questions about images. Top: the system is produc-
ing quite sensible answers to rather difﬁcult questions about the image. Bottom: less satis-
factory answers. For example, the system is guessing about the number of holes in a pizza,
because it doesn’t understand what counts as a hole, and it has real difﬁculty counting. Simi-
larly, the system selects brown for the cat’s leg because the background is brown and it can’t
localize the leg properly. Image credits: (Top) Tobyanna/Shutterstock; 679411/Shutterstock;
ESB Professional/Shutterstock; Africa Studio/Shutterstock; (Bottom) Stuart Russell; Max-
isport/Shutterstock; Chendongshan/Shutterstock; Scott Biales DitchTheMap/Shutterstock.
The images shown are similar but not identical to the original images to which the question-
answering system was applied. For the original images see Goyal et al. (2017).
The most accurate methods search through the sentences that the model can generate to ﬁnd
the best, and strong methods appear to require a slow search. Sentences are evaluated with
a set of scores that check whether the generated sentence (a) uses phrases common in the
ground truth annotations and (b) doesn’t use other phrases. These scores are hard to use
directly as a loss function, but reinforcement learning methods can be used to train networks
that get very good scores. Often there will be an image in the training set whose description
has the same set of words as an image in the test set; in that case a captioning system can just
retrieve a valid caption rather than having to generate a new one. Caption writing systems
produce a mix of excellent results and embarrassing errors (see Figure 27.19).
Captioning systems can hide their ignorance by omitting to mention details they can’t get
right or by using contextual cues to guess. For example, captioning systems tend to be poor at
identifying the gender of people in images, and often guess based on training data statistics.
That can lead to errors—men also like shopping and women also snowboard. One way to
establish whether a system has a good representation of what is happening in an image is to
force it to answer questions about the image. This is a visual question answering or VQA
Visual question
answering (VQA)
system. An alternative is a visual dialog system, which is given a picture, its caption, and a
Visual dialog
dialog. The system must then answer the last question in the dialog. As Figure 27.20 shows,
vision remains extremely hard and VQA systems often make errors.


