Section 27.4
Classifying Images
1003
Foreshortening
Aspect
Occlusion
Deformation
Figure 27.11 Important sources of appearance variation that can make different images of
the same object look different. First, elements can foreshorten, like the circular patch on the
top left. This patch is viewed at a glancing angle, and so is elliptical in the image. Second,
objects viewed from different directions can change shape quite dramatically, a phenomenon
known as aspect. On the top right are three different aspects of a doughnut. Occlusion causes
the handle of the mug on the bottom left to disappear when the mug is rotated. In this case,
because the body and handle belong to the same mug, we have self-occlusion. Finally, on the
bottom right, some objects can deform dramatically.
different at different times depending on several effects, (as illustrated in Figure 27.11):
• Lighting, which changes the brightness and color of the image.
• Foreshortening, which causes a pattern viewed at a glancing angle to be distorted.
• Aspect, which causes objects to look different when seen from different directions. A
doughnut seen from the side looks like a ﬂattened oval, but from above it is an annulus.
• Occlusion, where some parts of the object are hidden. Objects can occlude one another,
or parts of an object can occlude other parts, an effect known as self-occlusion.
• Deformation, where the object changes its shape. For example, the tennis player moves
her arms and legs.
Modern methods deal with these problems by learning representations and classiﬁers from
very large quantities of training data using a convolutional neural network. With a sufﬁciently
rich training set the classiﬁer will have seen any effect of importance many times in training,
and so can adjust for the effect.
27.4.1 Image classiﬁcation with convolutional neural networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are spectacularly successful image classiﬁers. With
enough training data and enough training ingenuity, CNNs produce very successful classiﬁ-
cation systems, much better than anyone has been able to produce with other methods.
The ImageNet data set played a historic role in the development of image classiﬁcation
systems by providing them with over 14 million training images, classiﬁed into over 30,000


1004
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
ﬁne-grained categories. ImageNet also spurred progress with an annual competition. Systems
are evaluated by both the classiﬁcation accuracy of their single best guess and by top-5 ac-
curacy, in which systems are allowed to submit ﬁve guesses—for example, malamute, husky,
akita, samoyed, eskimo dog. ImageNet has 189 subcategories of dog, so even dog-loving
humans ﬁnd it hard to label images correctly with a single guess.
In the ﬁrst ImageNet competition in 2010, systems could do no better than 70% top-5
accuracy. The introduction of convolutional neural networks in 2012 and their subsequent
reﬁnement led to an accuracy of 98% in top-5 (surpassing human performance) and 87% in
top-1 accuracy by 2019. The primary reason for this success seems to be that the features that
are being used by CNN classiﬁers are learned from data, not hand-crafted by a researcher;
this ensures that the features are actually useful for classiﬁcation.
Progress in image classiﬁcation has been rapid because of the availability of large, chal-
lenging data sets such as ImageNet; because of competitions based on these data sets that
are fair and open; and because of the widespread dissemination of successful models. The
winners of competitions publish the code and often the pretrained parameters of their models,
making it easy for others to ﬁddle with successful architectures and try to make them better.
27.4.2 Why convolutional neural networks classify images well
Image classiﬁcation is best understood by looking at data sets, but ImageNet is much too
large to look at in detail. The MNIST data set is a collection of 70,000 images of handwritten
digits, 0–9, which is often used as a standard warmup data set. Looking at this data set (some
examples appear in Figure 27.12) exposes some important, quite general, properties. You can
take an image of a digit and make a number of small alterations without changing the identity
of the digit: you can shift it, rotate it, make it brighter or darker, smaller or larger. This means
that individual pixel values are not particularly informative—we know that an 8 should have
some dark pixels in the center and a 0 should not, but those dark pixels will be in slightly
different pixel locations in each instance of an 8.
Another important property of images is that local patterns can be quite informative:
The digits 0, 6, 8 and 9 have loops; the digits 4 and 8 have crossings; the digits 1, 2, 3, 5
and 7 have line endings, but no loops or crossings; the digits 6 and 9 have loops and line
endings. Furthermore, spatial relations between local patterns are informative. A 1 has two
line endings above one another; a 6 has a line ending above a loop. These observations
suggest a strategy that is a central tenet of modern computer vision: you construct features
that respond to patterns in small, localized neighborhoods; then other features look at patterns
of those features; then others look at patterns of those, and so on.
This is what convolutional neural networks do well. You should think of a layer—a con-
volution followed by a ReLU activation function—as a local pattern detector (Figure 27.12).
The convolution measures how much each local window of the image looks like the kernel
pattern; the ReLU sets low-scoring windows to zero, and emphasizes high-scoring windows.
So convolution with multiple kernels ﬁnds multiple patterns; furthermore, composite patterns
can be detected by applying another layer to the output of the ﬁrst layer.
Think about the output of the ﬁrst convolutional layer. Each location receives inputs from
pixels in a window about that location. The output of the ReLU, as we have seen, forms a
simple pattern detector. Now if we put a second layer on top of this, each location in the
second layer receives inputs from ﬁrst-layer values in a window about that location. This


Section 27.4
Classifying Images
1005
Digits
Kernels
Convolution output
Test against threshold 
Figure 27.12 On the far left, some images from the MNIST data set. Three kernels appear
on the center left. They are shown at actual size (tiny blocks) and magniﬁed to reveal their
content: mid-grey is zero, light is positive, and dark is negative. Center right shows the results
of applying these kernels to the images. Right shows pixels where the response is bigger than
a threshold (green) or smaller than a threshold (red). You should notice that this gives (from
top to bottom): a horizontal bar detector; a vertical bar detector; and (harder to note) a line
ending detector. These detectors pay attention to the contrast of the bar, so (for example) a
horizontal bar that is light on top and dark below produces a positive (green) response, and
one that is dark on top and light below gets a negative (red) response. These detectors are
moderately effective, but not perfect.
means that locations in the second layer are affected by a larger window of pixels than those
in the ﬁrst layer. You should think of these as representing “patterns of patterns.” If we place
a third layer on top of the second layer, locations in that third layer will depend on an even
larger window of pixels; a fourth layer will depend on a yet larger window, and so on. The
network is creating patterns at multiple levels, and is doing that by learning from the data
rather than having the patterns given to it by a programmer.
While training a CNN “out of the box” does sometimes work, it helps to know a few
practical techniques. One of the most important is data set augmentation, in which training
Data set
augmentation
examples are copied and modiﬁed slightly. For example, one might randomly shift, rotate,
or stretch an image by a small amount, or randomly shift the hue of the pixels by a small
amount. Introducing this simulated variation in viewpoint or lighting to the data set helps to
increase the size of the data set, though of course the new examples are highly correlated with
the originals. It is also possible to use augmentation at test time rather than training time. In
this approach, the image is replicated and modiﬁed several times (e.g., with random cropping)
and the classiﬁer is run on each of the modiﬁed images. The outputs of the classiﬁer from
each copy are then used to vote for a ﬁnal decision on the overall class.
When you are classifying images of scenes, every pixel could be helpful. But when you
are classifying images of objects, some pixels aren’t part of the object, and so might be a


1006
Chapter 27
Computer Vision
distraction. For example, if a cat is lying on a dog bed, we want a classiﬁer to concentrate
on the pixels of the cat, not the bed. Modern image classiﬁers handle this well, classifying
an image as “cat” accurately even if few pixels actually lie on the cat. There are two reasons
for this. First, CNN-based classiﬁers are good at ignoring patterns that aren’t discriminative.
Second, patterns that lie off the object might be discriminative (e.g., a cat toy, a collar with
a little bell, or a dish of cat food might actually help tell that we are looking at a cat). This
effect is known as context. Context can help or can hurt, depending quite strongly on the
Context
particular data set and application.
27.5 Detecting Objects
Image classiﬁers predict what is in the image—they classify the whole image as belonging to
one class. Object detectors ﬁnd multiple objects in an image, report what class each object is,
and also report where each object is by giving a bounding box around the object.1 The set of
Bounding box
classes is ﬁxed in advance. So we might try to detect all faces, all cars, or all cats.
We can build an object detector by looking at a small sliding window onto the larger
Sliding window
image—a rectangle. At each spot, we classify what we see in the window, using a CNN
classiﬁer. We then take the high-scoring classiﬁcations—a cat over here and a dog over
there—and ignore the other windows. After some work resolving conﬂicts, we have a ﬁnal
set of objects with their locations. There are still some details to work out:
• Decide on a window shape: The easiest choice by far is to use axis-aligned rectangles.
(The alternative—some form of mask that cuts the object out of the image—is hardly
ever used, because it is hard to represent and to compute with.) We still need to choose
the width and height of the rectangles.
• Build a classiﬁer for windows: We already know how to do this with a CNN.
• Decide which windows to look at: Out of all possible windows, we want to select ones
that are likely to have interesting objects in them.
• Choose which windows to report: Windows will overlap, and we don’t want to report
the same object multiple times in slightly different windows. Some objects are not
worth mentioning; think about the number of chairs and people in a picture of a large
packed lecture hall. Should they all be reported as individual objects? Perhaps only the
objects that appear large in the image—the front row—should be reported. The choice
depends on the intended use of the object detector.
• Report precise locations of objects using these windows: Once we know that the
object is somewhere in the window, we can afford to do more computation to ﬁgure out
a more precise location within the window.
Let’s look more carefully at the problem of deciding which windows to look at. Search-
ing all possible windows isn’t efﬁcient—in an n × n pixel image there are O(n4) possible
rectangular windows. But we know that windows that contain objects tend to have quite co-
herent color and texture. On the other hand, windows that cut an object in half have regions
or edges that cross the side of the window. So it makes sense to have a mechanism that scores
1
We will use the term “box” to mean any axis-aligned rectangular region of the image, and the term “window”
mostly as a synonym for “box,” but with the connotation that we have a window onto the input where we are
hoping to see something, and a bounding box in the output when we have found it.


Section 27.5
Detecting Objects
1007
“objectness”—whether a box has an object in it, independent of what that object is. We can
ﬁnd the boxes that look like they have an object in them, and then classify the object for just
those boxes that pass the objectness test.
A network that ﬁnds regions with objects is called a regional proposal network (RPN).
Regional proposal
network (RPN)
The object detector known as Faster RCNN encodes a large collection of bounding boxes as a
map of ﬁxed size. Then it builds a network that can predict a score for each box, and trains this
network so the score is large when the box contains an object, and small otherwise. Encoding
boxes as a map is straightforward. We consider boxes centered on points throughout the
image; we don’t need to consider every possible point (because moving by one pixel is not
likely to change the classiﬁcation); a good choice is a stride (the offset between center points)
of 16 pixels. For each center point we consider several possible boxes, called anchor boxes.
Faster RCNN uses nine boxes: small, medium, and large sizes; and tall, wide, and square
aspect ratios.
In terms of the neural network architecture, construct a 3D block where each spatial
location in the block has two dimensions for the center point and one dimension for the type
of box. Now any box with a good enough objectness score is called a region of interest
(ROI), and must be checked by a classiﬁer. But CNN classiﬁers prefer images of ﬁxed size,
and the boxes that pass the objectness test will differ in size and shape. We can’t make
the boxes have the same number of pixels, but we can make them have the same number
of features by sampling the pixels to extract features, a process called ROI pooling. This
ﬁxed-size feature map is then passed to the classiﬁer.
Now for the problem of deciding which windows to report. Assume we look at windows
of size 32×32 with a stride of 1: each window is offset by just one pixel from the one before.
There will be many windows that are similar, and should have similar scores. If they all have
a score above threshold we don’t want to report all of them, because they very likely all refer
to slightly different views of the same object. On the other hand if the stride is too large, it
might be that an object is not contained within any one window, and will be missed. Instead,
we can use a greedy algorithm called non-maximum suppression. First, build a sorted list
Non-maximum
suppression
of all windows with scores over a threshold. Then, while there are windows in the list, choose
the window with the highest score and accept it as containing an object; discard from the list
all other largely overlapping windows.
Finally, we have the problem of reporting the precise location of objects. Assume we
have a window that has a high score, and has passed through non-maximum suppression. This
window is unlikely to be in exactly the right place (remember, we looked at a relatively small
number of windows with a small number of possible sizes). We use the feature representation
computed by the classiﬁer to predict improvements that will trim the window down to a
proper bounding box, a step known as bounding box regression.
Bounding box
regression
Evaluating object detectors takes care. First we need a test set: a collection of images
with each object in the image marked by a ground truth category label and bounding box.
Usually, the boxes and labels are supplied by humans. Then we feed each image to the object
detector and compare its output to the ground truth. We should be willing to accept boxes
that are off by a few pixels, because the ground truth boxes won’t be perfect. The evaluation
score should balance recall (ﬁnding all the objects that are there) and precision (not ﬁnding
objects that are not there).


