Section 24.4
Augmented Grammars
895
Operator(÷)
3
(
)
4
2
+
Number(2)
Digit(2)
Number(4)
Digit(4)
Operator(+)
Digit(3)
Number(3)
Exp(5)
Exp(2)
Exp(2)
Exp(4)
Exp(2)
Exp(3)
÷
Figure 24.11 Parse tree with semantic interpretations for the string “3+(4÷2)”.
S(pred(n)) →NP(n) VP(pred)
VP(pred(n)) →Verb(pred) NP(n)
NP(n) →Name(n)
Name(Ali) →Ali
Name(Bo) →Bo
Verb(λy λx Loves(x,y)) →loves
Ali
loves
Bo
Name(Ali)
Name(Bo)
NP(Bo)
NP(Ali)
S(Loves(Ali, Bo))
Verb(λy λ x Loves(x, y))
VP(λx Loves(x, Bo))
(a)
(b)
Figure 24.12 (a) A grammar that can derive a parse tree and semantic interpretation for “Ali
loves Bo” (and three other sentences). Each category is augmented with a single argument
representing the semantics. (b) A parse tree with semantic interpretations for the string “Ali
loves Bo.”
which is equivalent to Loves(Ali,Bo). Technically, we say that this is a β-reduction of the
lambda function application.
The rest of the semantics follows in a straightforward way from the choices we have made
so far. Because VPs are represented as predicates, verbs should be predicates as well. The
verb “loves” is represented as λy λx Loves(x,y), the predicate that, when given the argument
Bo, returns the predicate λx Loves(x,Bo). We end up with the grammar and parse tree shown
in Figure 24.12. In a more complete grammar, we would put all the augmentations (seman-
tics, case, person-number, and head) together into one set of rules. Here we show only the
semantic augmentation to make it clearer how the rules work.


896
Chapter 24
Natural Language Processing
24.4.2 Learning semantic grammars
Unfortunately, the Penn Treebank does not include semantic representations of its sentences,
just syntactic trees. So if we are going to learn a semantic grammar, we will need a different
source of examples. Zettlemoyer and Collins (2005) describe a system that learns a grammar
for a question-answering system from examples that consist of a sentence paired with the
semantic form for the sentence:
• Sentence: What states border Texas?
• Logical Form: λx.state(x)∧λx.borders(x,Texas)
Given a large collection of pairs like this and a little bit of hand-coded knowledge for each
new domain, the system generates plausible lexical entries (for example, that “Texas” and
“state” are nouns such that state(Texas) is true), and simultaneously learns parameters for a
grammar that allows the system to parse sentences into semantic representations. Zettlemoyer
and Collins’s system achieved 79% accuracy on two different test sets of unseen sentences.
Zhao and Huang (2015) demonstrate a shift-reduce parser that runs faster, and achieves 85%
to 89% accuracy.
A limitation of these systems is that the training data includes logical forms. These are
expensive to create, requiring human annotators with specialized expertise—not everyone
understands the subtleties of lambda calculus and predicate logic. It is much easier to gather
examples of question/answer pairs:
• Question: What states border Texas?
• Answer: Louisiana, Arkansas, Oklahoma, New Mexico.
• Question: How many times would Rhode Island ﬁt into California?
• Answer: 135
Such question/answer pairs are quite common on the Web, so a large database can be put
together without human experts. Using this large source of data it is possible to build parsers
that outperform those that use a small database of annotated logical forms (Liang et al., 2011;
Liang and Potts, 2015). The key approach described in these papers is to invent an internal
logical form that is compositional but does not allow an exponentially large search space.
24.5 Complications of Real Natural Language
The grammar of real English is endlessly complex (and other languages are equally complex).
We will brieﬂy mention some of the topics that contribute to this complexity.
Quantiﬁcation: Consider the sentence “Every agent feels a breeze.” The sentence has
Quantiﬁcation
only one syntactic parse under E0, but it is semantically ambiguous: is there one breeze
that is felt by all the agents, or does each agent feel a separate personal breeze? The two
interpretations can be represented as
∀a a∈Agents ⇒
∃b b∈Breezes∧Feel(a,b) ;
∃b b∈Breezes∧∀a a∈Agents ⇒
Feel(a,b).


Section 24.5
Complications of Real Natural Language
897
One standard approach to quantiﬁcation is for the grammar to deﬁne not an actual logical
semantic sentence, but rather a quasi-logical form that is then turned into a logical sentence
Quasi-logical form
by algorithms outside of the parsing process. Those algorithms can have preference rules for
choosing one quantiﬁer scope over another—preferences that need not be reﬂected directly
in the grammar.
Pragmatics: We have shown how an agent can perceive a string of words and use a
Pragmatics
grammar to derive a set of possible semantic interpretations. Now we address the problem
of completing the interpretation by adding context-dependent information about the current
situation. The most obvious need for pragmatic information is in resolving the meaning of
indexicals, which are phrases that refer directly to the current situation. For example, in the
Indexical
sentence “I am in Boston today,” both “I” and “today” are indexicals. The word “I” would
be represented by Speaker, a ﬂuent that refers to different objects at different times, and it
would be up to the hearer to resolve the referent of the ﬂuent—that is not considered part of
the grammar but rather an issue of pragmatics.
Another part of pragmatics is interpreting the speaker’s intent. The speaker’s utterance
is considered a speech act, and it is up to the hearer to decipher what type of action it is—a
Speech act
question, a statement, a promise, a warning, a command, and so on. A command such as
“go to 2 2” implicitly refers to the hearer. So far, our grammar for S covers only declarative
sentences. We can extend it to cover commands—a command is a verb phrase where the
subject is implicitly the hearer of the command:
S(Command(pred(Hearer))) →VP(pred).
Long-distance dependencies: In Figure 24.8 we saw that “she didn’t hear or even see
Long-distance
dependencies
him” was parsed with two gaps where an NP is missing, but refers to the NP “him.” We can
use the symbol
to represent the gaps: “she didn’t [hear
or even see ] him.” In general,
the distance between the gap and the NP it refers to can be arbitrarily long: in “Who did the
agent tell you to give the gold to ?” the gap refers to “Who,” which is 11 words away.
A complex system of augmented rules can be used to make sure that the missing NPs
match up properly. The rules are complex; for example, you can’t have a gap in one branch
of an NP conjunction: “What did she play [NP Dungeons and ]?” is ungrammatical. But
you can have the same gap in both branches of a VP conjunction, as in the sentence “What
did you [VP [VP smell ] and [VP shoot an arrow at ]]?”
Time and tense: Suppose we want to represent the difference between “Ali loves Bo”
Time and tense
and “Ali loved Bo.” English uses verb tenses (past, present, and future) to indicate the relative
time of an event. One good choice to represent the time of events is the event calculus notation
of Section 10.3. In event calculus we have
Ali loves Bo: E1 ∈Loves(Ali,Bo)∧During(Now,Extent(E1))
Ali loved Bo: E2 ∈Loves(Ali,Bo)∧After(Now,Extent(E2)).
This suggests that our two lexical rules for the words “loves” and “loved” should be these:
Verb(λy λx e∈Loves(x,y)∧During(Now,e)) →loves
Verb(λy λx e∈Loves(x,y)∧After(Now,e)) →loved.
Other than this change, everything else about the grammar remains the same, which is en-
couraging news; it suggests we are on the right track if we can so easily add a complication
like the tense of verbs (although we have just scratched the surface of a complete grammar
for time and tense).


