Summary
901
n-gram counts of speciﬁc words) and could form compositional models throughout the vari-
ous levels of the deep network to effectively pass information along. Subsequent work using
the attention-focusing mechanism of the transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2018) increased
performance further, and a hybrid model incorporating aspects of both these models does
better still, approaching human-level performance on some language pairs (Wu et al., 2016b;
Chen et al., 2018).
Information extraction is the process of acquiring knowledge by skimming a text and
Information
extraction
looking for occurrences of particular classes of objects and for relationships among them.
A typical task is to extract instances of addresses from Web pages, with database ﬁelds for
street, city, state, and zip code; or instances of storms from weather reports, with ﬁelds for
temperature, wind speed, and precipitation. If the source text is well structured (for ex-
ample, in the form of a table), then simple techniques such as regular expressions can ex-
tract the information (Cafarella et al., 2008). It gets harder if we are trying to extract all
facts, rather than a speciﬁc type (such as weather reports); Banko et al. (2007) describe the
TEXTRUNNER system that performs extraction over an open, expanding set of relations. For
free-form text, techniques include hidden Markov models and rule-based learning systems
(as used in TEXTRUNNER and NELL (Never-Ending Language Learning) (Mitchell et al.,
2018)). More recent systems use recurrent neural networks, taking advantage of the ﬂexibility
of word embeddings. You can ﬁnd an overview in Kumar (2017).
Information retrieval is the task of ﬁnding documents that are relevant and important
Information retrieval
for a given query. Internet search engines such as Google and Baidu perform this task billions
of times a day. Three good textbooks on the subject are Manning et al. (2008), Croft et al.
(2010), and Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto (2011).
Question Answering is a different task, in which the query really is a question, such as
Question Answering
“Who founded the U.S. Coast Guard?” and the response is not a ranked list of documents but
rather an actual answer: “Alexander Hamilton.” There have been question-answering systems
since the 1960s that rely on syntactic parsing as discussed in this chapter, but only since
2001 have such systems used Web information retrieval to radically increase their breadth of
coverage. Katz (1997) describes the START parser and question answerer. Banko et al. (2002)
describe ASKMSR, which was less sophisticated in terms of its syntactic parsing ability, but
more aggressive in using Web search and sorting through the results. For example, to answer
“Who founded the U.S. Coast Guard?” it would search for queries such as [* founded the
U.S. Coast Guard] and [the U.S. Coast Guard was founded by *], and then examine the
multiple resulting Web pages to pick out a likely response, knowing that the query word
“who” suggests that the answer should be a person. The Text REtrieval Conference (TREC)
gathers research on this topic and has hosted competitions on an annual basis since 1991
(Allan et al., 2017). Recently we have seen other test sets, such as the AI2 ARC test set of
basic science questions (Clark et al., 2018).
Summary
The main points of this chapter are as follows:
• Probabilistic language models based on n-grams recover a surprising amount of infor-
mation about a language. They can perform well on such diverse tasks as language


902
Chapter 24
Natural Language Processing
identiﬁcation, spelling correction, sentiment analysis, genre classiﬁcation, and named-
entity recognition.
• These language models can have millions of features, so preprocessing and smoothing
the data to reduce noise is important.
• In building a statistical language system, it is best to devise a model that can make good
use of available data, even if the model seems overly simplistic.
• Word embeddings can give a richer representation of words and their similarities.
• To capture the hierarchical structure of language, phrase structure grammars (and in
particular, context-free grammars) are useful. The probabilistic context-free grammar
(PCFG) formalism is widely used, as is the dependency grammar formalism.
• Sentences in a context-free language can be parsed in O(n3) time by a chart parser
such as the CYK algorithm, which requires grammar rules to be in Chomsky Normal
Form. With a small loss in accuracy, natural languages can be parsed in O(n) time,
using a beam search or a shift-reduce parser.
• A treebank can be a resource for learning a PCFG grammar with parameters.
• It is convenient to augment a grammar to handle issues such as subject–verb agreement
and pronoun case, and to represent information at the level of words rather than just at
the level of categories.
• Semantic interpretation can also be handled by an augmented grammar. We can learn
a semantic grammar from a corpus of questions paired either with the logical form of
the question, or with the answer.
• Natural language is complex and difﬁcult to capture in a formal grammar.
Bibliographical and Historical Notes
N-gram letter models for language modeling were proposed by Markov (1913). Claude Shan-
non (Shannon and Weaver, 1949) was the ﬁrst to generate n-gram word models of English.
The bag-of-words model gets its name from a passage from linguist Zellig Harris (1954),
“language is not merely a bag of words but a tool with particular properties.” Norvig (2009)
gives some examples of tasks that can be accomplished with n-gram models.
Chomsky (1956, 1957) pointed out the limitations of ﬁnite-state models compared with
context-free models, concluding, “Probabilistic models give no particular insight into some
of the basic problems of syntactic structure.” This is true, but probabilistic models do provide
insight into some other basic problems—problems that context-free models ignore. Chom-
sky’s remarks had the unfortunate effect of scaring many people away from statistical models
for two decades, until these models reemerged for use in the ﬁeld of speech recognition
(Jelinek, 1976), and in cognitive science, where optimality theory (Smolensky and Prince,
1993; Kager, 1999) posited that language works by ﬁnding the most probable candidate that
optimally satisﬁes competing constraints.
Add-one smoothing, ﬁrst suggested by Pierre-Simon Laplace (1816), was formalized by
Jeffreys (1948). Other smoothing techniques include interpolation smoothing (Jelinek and
Mercer, 1980), Witten–Bell smoothing (1991), Good–Turing smoothing (Church and Gale,


Bibliographical and Historical Notes
903
1991), Kneser–Ney smoothing (1995, 2004), and stupid backoff (Brants et al., 2007). Chen
and Goodman (1996) and Goodman (2001) survey smoothing techniques.
Simple n-gram letter and word models are not the only possible probabilistic models. The
latent Dirichlet allocation model (Blei et al., 2002; Hoffman et al., 2011) is a probabilistic
text model that views a document as a mixture of topics, each with its own distribution of
words. This model can be seen as an extension and rationalization of the latent semantic
indexing model of Deerwester et al. (1990) and is also related to the multiple-cause mixture
model of (Sahami et al., 1996). And of course there is great interest in non-probabilistic
language models, such as the deep learning models covered in Chapter 25.
Joulin et al. (2016) give a bag of tricks for efﬁcient text classiﬁcation. Joachims (2001)
uses statistical learning theory and support vector machines to give a theoretical analysis of
when classiﬁcation will be successful. Apt´e et al. (1994) report an accuracy of 96% in clas-
sifying Reuters news articles into the “Earnings” category. Koller and Sahami (1997) report
accuracy up to 95% with a naive Bayes classiﬁer, and up to 98.6% with a Bayes classiﬁer.
Schapire and Singer (2000) show that simple linear classiﬁers can often achieve accu-
racy almost as good as more complex models, and run faster. Zhang et al. (2016) describe a
character-level (rather than word-level) text classiﬁer. Witten et al. (1999) describe compres-
sion algorithms for classiﬁcation, and show the deep connection between the LZW compres-
sion algorithm and maximum-entropy language models.
Wordnet (Fellbaum, 2001) is a publicly available dictionary of about 100,000 words and
phrases, categorized into parts of speech and linked by semantic relations such as synonym,
antonym, and part-of. Charniak (1996) and Klein and Manning (2001) discuss parsing with
treebank grammars. The British National Corpus (Leech et al., 2001) contains 100 million
words, and the World Wide Web contains several trillion words; Franz and Brants (2006)
describe the publicly available Google n-gram corpus of 13 million unique words from a
trillion words of Web text. Buck et al. (2014) describe a similar data set from the Common
Crawl project. The Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993; Bies et al., 2015) provides parse
trees for a 3-million-word corpus of English.
Many of the n-gram model techniques are also used in bioinformatics problems. Bio-
statistics and probabilistic NLP are coming closer together, as each deals with long, structured
sequences chosen from an alphabet.
Early part-of-speech (POS) taggers used a variety of techniques, including rule sets (Brill,
1992), n-grams (Church, 1988), decision trees (M`arquez and Rodr´ıguez, 1998), HMMs
(Brants, 2000), and logistic regression (Ratnaparkhi, 1996). Historically, a logistic regres-
sion model was also called a “maximum entropy Markov model” or MEMM, so some work
is under that name. Jurafsky and Martin (2020) have a good chapter on POS tagging. Ng and
Jordan (2002) compare discriminative and generative models for classiﬁcation tasks.
Like semantic networks, context-free grammars were ﬁrst discovered by ancient Indian
grammarians (especially Panini, ca. 350 BCE) studying Shastric Sanskrit (Ingerman, 1967).
They were reinvented by Noam Chomsky (1956) for the analysis of English and indepen-
dently by John Backus (1959) and Peter Naur for the analysis of Algol-58.
Probabilistic context-free grammars were ﬁrst investigated by Booth (1969) and Sa-
lomaa (1969). Algorithms for PCFGs are presented in the excellent short monograph by
Charniak (1993) and the excellent long textbooks by Manning and Sch¨utze (1999) and Juraf-
sky and Martin (2020). Baker (1979) introduces the inside–outside algorithm for learning a


