892
Chapter 24
Natural Language Processing
24.4 Augmented Grammars
So far we have dealt with context-free grammars. But not every NP can appear in every
context with equal probability. The sentence “I ate a banana” is ﬁne, but “Me ate a banana”
is ungrammatical, and “I ate a bandanna” is unlikely.
The issue is that our grammar is focused on lexical categories, like Pronoun, but while “I”
and “me” are both pronouns, only “I” can be the subject of a sentence. Similarly, “banana”
and “bandanna” are both nouns, but the former is much more likely to be object of “ate”.
Linguists say that the pronoun “I” is in the subjective case (i.e., is the subject of a verb) and
“me” is in the objective case3 (i.e., is the object of a verb). They also say that “I” is in the ﬁrst
person (“you” is second person, and “she” is third person) and is singular (“we” is plural).
A category like Pronoun that has been augmented with features like “subjective case, ﬁrst
person singular” is called a subcategory.
Subcategory
In this section we show how a grammar can represent this kind of knowledge to make
ﬁner-grained distinctions about which sentences are more likely. We will also show how to
construct a representation of the semantics of a phrase, in a compositional way. All of this
will be accomplished with an augmented grammar in which the nonterminals are not just
Augmented
grammar
atomic symbols like Pronoun or NP, but are structured representations. For example, the
noun phrase “I” could be represented as NP(Sbj,1S,Speaker), which means “a noun phrase
that is in the subjective case, ﬁrst person singular, and whose meaning is the speaker of the
sentence.” In contrast, “me” would be represented as NP(Obj,1S,Speaker), marking the fact
that it is in the objective case.
Consider the sequence “Noun and Noun or Noun,” which can be parsed either as “[Noun
and Noun] or Noun,” or as “Noun and [Noun or Noun].” Our context-free grammar has no
way to express a preference for one parse over the other, because the rule for conjoined NPs,
NP →NP Conjunction NP[0.05], will give the same probability to each parse. We would
like a grammar that prefers the parses “[[spaghetti and meatballs] or lasagna]” and “[spaghetti
and [pie or cake]]” over the alternative bracketing for each of these phrases.
A lexicalized PCFG is a type of augmented grammar that allows us to assign probabili-
Lexicalized PCFG
ties based on properties of the words in a phrase other than just the syntactic categories. The
data would be very sparse indeed if the probability of, say, a 40-word sentence depended on
all 40 words—this is the same problem we noted with n-grams. To simplify, we introduce the
notion of the head of a phrase—the most important word. Thus, “banana” is the head of the
Head
NP “a banana” and “ate” is the head of the VP “ate a banana.” The notation VP(v) denotes a
phrase with category VP whose head word is v. Here is a lexicalized PCFG:
VP(v) →Verb(v) NP(n)
[P1(v,n)]
VP(v) →Verb(v)
[P2(v)]
NP(n) →Article(a) Adjs(j) Noun(n)
[P3(n,a)]
NP(n) →NP(n) Conjunction(c) NP(m) [P4(n,c,m)]
Verb(ate) →ate
[0.002]
Noun(banana) →banana
[0.0007]
3
The subjective case is also sometimes called the nominative case and the objective case is sometimes called
the accusative case. Many languages also make another distinction with a dative case for words in the indirect
object position.


Section 24.4
Augmented Grammars
893
S(v) →NP(Sbj,pn,n) VP(pn,v) | ...
NP(c,pn,n) →Pronoun(c,pn,n) | Noun(c,pn,n) | ...
VP(pn,v) →Verb(pn,v) NP(Obj,pn,n) | ...
PP(head) →Prep(head) NP(Obj,pn,h)
Pronoun(Sbj,1S,I) →I
Pronoun(Sbj,1P,we) →we
Pronoun(Obj,1S,me) →me
Pronoun(Obj,3P,them) →them
Verb(3S,see) →see
Figure 24.9 Part of an augmented grammar that handles case agreement, subject–verb agree-
ment, and head words. Capitalized names are constants: Sbj, and Obj for subjective and ob-
jective case; 1S for ﬁrst person singular; 1P and 3P for ﬁrst and third person plural. As usual,
lowercase names are variables. For simplicity, the probabilities have been omitted.
Here P1(v,n) means the probability of a VP headed by v joining with an NP headed by n to
form a VP. We can specify that “ate a banana” is more probable than “ate a bandanna” by
ensuring that P1(ate,banana) > P1(ate,bandanna). Note that since we are considering only
phrase heads, the distinction between “ate a banana” and “ate a rancid banana” will not be
caught by P1. Conceptually, P1 is a huge table of probabilities: if there are 5,000 verbs and
10,000 nouns in the vocabulary, then P1 requires 50 million entries, but most of them will not
be stored explicitly; rather they will be derived from smoothing and backoff. For example,
we can back off from P1(v,n) to a model that depends only on v. Such a model would require
10,000 times fewer parameters, but can still capture important regularities, such as the fact
that a transitive verb like “ate” is more likely to be followed by an NP (regardless of the head)
than an intransitive verb like “sleep.”
We saw in Section 24.2 that the simple grammar for E0 overgenerates, producing non-
sentences such as “I saw she” or “I sees her.” To avoid this problem, our grammar would have
to know that “her,” not “she,” is a valid object of “saw” (or of any other verb) and that “see,”
not “sees,” is the form of the verb that accompanies the subject “I.”
We could encode these facts completely in the probability entries, for example making
P1(v,she) be a very small number, for all verbs v. But it is more concise and modular to
augment the category NP with additional variables: NP(c,pn,n) is used to represent a noun
phrase with case c (subjective or objective), person and number pn (e.g., third person singu-
lar), and head noun n. Figure 24.9 shows an augmented lexicalized grammar that handles
these additional variables. Let’s consider one grammar rule in detail:
S(v) →NP(Sbj,pn,n) VP(pn,v) [P5(n,v)].
This rule says that when an NP is followed by a VP they can form an S, but only if the NP
has the subjective (Sbj) case and the person and number (pn) of the NP and VP are identical.
(We say that they are in agreement.) If that holds, then we have an S whose head is the verb
from the VP. Here is an example lexical rule,
Pronoun(Sbj,1S,I) →I [0.005]
which says that “I” is a Pronoun in the subjective case, ﬁrst-person singular, with head “I.”


894
Chapter 24
Natural Language Processing
Exp(op(x1,x2)) →Exp(x1) Operator(op) Exp(x2)
Exp(x) →( Exp(x) )
Exp(x) →Number(x)
Number(x) →Digit(x)
Number(10×x1 +x2) →Number(x1) Digit(x2)
Operator(+) →+
Operator(−) →-
Operator(×) →×
Operator(÷) →÷
Digit(0) →0
Digit(1) →1
...
Figure 24.10 A grammar for arithmetic expressions, augmented with semantics. Each vari-
able xi represents the semantics of a constituent.
24.4.1 Semantic interpretation
To show how to add semantics to a grammar, we start with an example that is simpler than En-
glish: the semantics of arithmetic expressions. Figure 24.10 shows a grammar for arithmetic
expressions, where each rule is augmented with a single argument indicating the semantic
interpretation of the phrase. The semantics of a digit such as “3” is the digit itself. The se-
mantics of the expression “3 + 4” is the operator “+” applied to the semantics of the phrases
“3” and “4.” The grammar rules obey the principle of compositional semantics—the se-
Compositional
semantics
mantics of a phrase is a function of the semantics of the subphrases. Figure 24.11 shows the
parse tree for 3+(4÷2) according to this grammar. The root of the parse tree is Exp(5), an
expression whose semantic interpretation is 5.
Now let’s move on to the semantics of English, or at least a tiny portion of it. We will use
ﬁrst-order logic for our semantic representation. So the simple sentence “Ali loves Bo” should
get the semantic representation Loves(Ali,Bo). But what about the constituent phrases? We
can represent the NP “Ali” with the logical term Ali. But the VP “loves Bo” is neither a logical
term nor a complete logical sentence. Intuitively, “loves Bo” is a description that might or
might not apply to a particular person. (In this case, it applies to Ali.) This means that
“loves Bo” is a predicate that, when combined with a term that represents a person, yields a
complete logical sentence.
Using the λ-notation (see page 277), we can represent “loves Bo” as the predicate
λx Loves(x,Bo).
Now we need a rule that says “an NP with semantics n followed by a VP with semantics pred
yields a sentence whose semantics is the result of applying pred to n:”
S(pred(n)) →NP(n) VP(pred).
The rule tells us that the semantic interpretation of “Ali loves Bo” is
(λx Loves(x,Bo))(Ali),


