CHAPTER 24
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING
In which we see how a computer can use natural language to communicate with humans
and learn from what they have written.
About 100,000 years ago, humans learned how to speak, and about 5,000 years ago they
learned to write. The complexity and diversity of human language sets Homo sapiens apart
from all other species. Of course there are other attributes that are uniquely human: no other
species wears clothes, creates art, or spends two hours a day on social media in the way that
humans do. But when Alan Turing proposed his test for intelligence, he based it on language,
not art or haberdashery, perhaps because of its universal scope and because language captures
so much of intelligent behavior: a speaker (or writer) has the goal of communicating some
knowledge, then plans some language that represents the knowledge, and acts to achieve
the goal. The listener (or reader) perceives the language, and infers the intended meaning.
This type of communication via language has allowed civilization to grow; it is our main
means of passing along cultural, legal, scientiﬁc, and technological knowledge. There are
three primary reasons for computers to do natural language processing (NLP):
Natural language
processing (NLP)
• To communicate with humans. In many situations it is convenient for humans to use
speech to interact with computers, and in most situations it is more convenient to use
natural language rather than a formal language such as ﬁrst-order predicate calculus.
• To learn.
Humans have written down a lot of knowledge using natural language.
Wikipedia alone has 30 million pages of facts such as “Bush babies are small nocturnal
primates,” whereas there are hardly any sources of facts like this written in formal logic.
If we want our system to know a lot, it had better understand natural language.
• To advance the scientiﬁc understanding of languages and language use, using the tools
of AI in conjunction with linguistics, cognitive psychology, and neuroscience.
In this chapter we examine various mathematical models for language, and discuss the tasks
that can be achieved using them.
24.1 Language Models
Formal languages, such as ﬁrst-order logic, are precisely deﬁned, as we saw in Chapter 8. A
grammar deﬁnes the syntax of legal sentences and semantic rules deﬁne the meaning.
Natural languages, such as English or Chinese, cannot be so neatly characterized:
• Language judgments vary from person to person and time to time. Everyone agrees that
“Not to be invited is sad” is a grammatical sentence of English, but people disagree on
the grammaticality of “To be not invited is sad.”


Section 24.1
Language Models
875
• Natural language is ambiguous (“He saw her duck” can mean either that she owns a
waterfowl, or that she made a downwards evasive move) and vague (“That’s great!”
does not specify precisely how great it is, nor what it is).
• The mapping from symbols to objects is not formally deﬁned. In ﬁrst-order logic, two
uses of the symbol “Richard” must refer to the same person, but in natural language two
occurrences of the same word or phrase may refer to different things in the world.
If we can’t make a deﬁnitive Boolean distinction between grammatical and ungrammati-
cal strings, we can at least say how likely or unlikely each one is.
We deﬁne a language model as a probability distribution describing the likelihood of
Language model
any string. Such a model should say that “Do I dare disturb the universe?” has a reasonable
probability as a string of English, but “Universe dare the I disturb do?” is extremely unlikely.
With a language model, we can predict what words are likely to come next in a text, and
thereby suggest completions for an email or text message. We can compute which alterations
to a text would make it more probable, and thereby suggest spelling or grammar corrections.
With a pair of models, we can compute the most probable translation of a sentence. With
some example question/answer pairs as training data, we can compute the most likely answer
to a question. So language models are at the heart of a broad range of natural language tasks.
The language modeling task itself also serves as a common benchmark to measure progress
in language understanding.
Natural languages are complex, so any language model will be, at best, an approximation.
The linguist Edward Sapir said “No language is tyrannically consistent. All grammars leak”
(Sapir, 1921). The philosopher Donald Davidson said “there is no such thing as language, not
if a language is . . . a clearly deﬁned shared structure” (Davidson, 1986), by which he meant
there is no one deﬁnitive language model for English in the way that there is for Python 3.8;
we all have different models, but we still somehow manage to muddle through and commu-
nicate. In this section we cover simplistic language models that are clearly wrong, but still
manage to be useful for certain tasks.
24.1.1 The bag-of-words model
Section 12.6.1 explained how a naive Bayes model based on the presence of speciﬁc words
could reliably classify sentences into categories; for example sentence (1) below is catego-
rized as business, and (2) as weather.
1. Stocks rallied on Monday, with major indexes gaining 1% as optimism persisted over
the ﬁrst quarter earnings season.
2. Heavy rain continued to pound much of the east coast on Monday, with ﬂood warnings
issued in New York City and other locations.
This section revisits the naive Bayes model, casting it as a full language model. That means
we don’t just want to know what category is most likely for each sentence; we want a joint
probability distribution over all sentences and categories. That suggests we should consider
all the words in the sentence. Given a sentence consisting of the words w1,w2,...wN (which
we will write as w1:N, as in Chapter 14), the naive Bayes formula (Equation (12.21)) gives us
P(Class|w1:N) = α P(Class)∏
j
P(w j |Class).
The application of naive Bayes to strings of words is called the bag-of-words model. It is
Bag-of-words model


876
Chapter 24
Natural Language Processing
a generative model that describes a process for generating a sentence: Imagine that for each
category (business, weather, etc.) we have a bag full of words (you can imagine each word
written on a slip of paper inside the bag; the more common the word, the more slips it is
duplicated on). To generate text, ﬁrst select one of the bags and discard the others. Reach
into that bag and pull out a word at random; this will be the ﬁrst word of the sentence. Then
put the word back and draw a second word. Repeat until an end-of-sentence indicator (e.g., a
period) is drawn.
This model is clearly wrong: it falsely assumes that each word is independent of the
others, and therefore it does not generate coherent English sentences. But it does allow us to
do classiﬁcation with good accuracy using the naive Bayes formula: the words “stocks” and
“earnings” are clear evidence for the business section, while “rain” and “cloudy” suggest the
weather section.
We can learn the prior probabilities needed for this model via supervised training on a
body or corpus of text, where each segment of text is labeled with a class. A corpus typically
Corpus
consists of at least a million words of text, and at least tens of thousands of distinct vocabulary
words. Recently we are seeing even larger corpuses being used, such as the 2.5 billion words
in Wikipedia or the 14 billion word iWeb corpus scraped from 22 million web pages.
From a corpus we can estimate the prior probability of each category, P(Class), by count-
ing how common each category is. We can also use counts to estimate the conditional prob-
ability of each word given the category, P(wj |Class). For example, if we’ve seen 3000 texts
and 300 of them were classiﬁed as business, then we can estimate P(Class = business) ≈
300/3000 = 0.1. And if within the business category we have seen 100,000 words and
the word “stocks” appeared 700 times, then we can estimate P(stocks|Class=business) ≈
700/100,000=0.007. Estimation by counting works well when we have high counts (and
low variance), but we will see in Section 24.1.4 a better way to estimate probabilities when
the counts are low.
Sometimes a different machine learning approach, such as logistic regression, neural
networks, or support vector machines, can work even better than naive Bayes. The features of
the machine learning model are the words in the vocabulary: “a,” “aardvark,” ..., “zyzzyva,”
and the values are the number of times each word appears in the text (or sometimes just a
Boolean value indicating whether the word appears or not). That makes the feature vector
large and sparse—we might have 100,000 words in the language model, and thus a feature
vector of length 100,000, but for a short text almost all the features will be zero.
As we have seen, some machine learning models work better when we do feature selec-
tion, limiting ourselves to a subset of the words as features. We could drop words that are
very rare (and thus have high variance in their predictive powers), as well as words that are
common to all classes (such as “the”) but don’t discriminate between classes. We can also
mix other features in with our word-based features; for example if we are classifying email
messages we could add features for the sender, the time the message was sent, the words
in the subject header, the presence of nonstandard punctuation, the percentage of uppercase
letters, whether there is an attachment, and so on.
Note it is not trivial to decide what a word is. Is “aren’t” one word, or should it be broken
up as “aren/’/t” or “are/n’t,” or something else? The process of dividing a text into a sequence
of words is called tokenization.
Tokenization


