Section 24.1
Language Models
877
24.1.2 N-gram word models
The bag-of-words model has limitations. For example, the word “quarter” is common in
both the business and sports categories. But the four-word sequence “ﬁrst quarter earnings
report” is common only in business and “fourth quarter touchdown passes” is common only
in sports. We’d like our model to make that distinction. We could tweak the bag-of-words
model by treating special phrases like “ﬁrst-quarter earnings report” as if they were single
words, but a more principled approach is to introduce a new model, where each word is
dependent on previous words. We can start by making a word dependent on all previous
words in a sentence:
P(w1:N) =
N
∏
j=1
P(w j |w1: j−1).
This model is in a sense perfectly “correct” in that it captures all possible interactions between
words, but it is not practical: with a vocabulary of 100,000 words and a sentence length of
40, this model would have 10200 parameters to estimate. We can compromise with a Markov
chain model that considers only the dependence between n adjacent words. This is known
as an n-gram model (from the Greek root gramma meaning “written thing”): a sequence of
N-gram model
written symbols of length n is called an n-gram, with special cases “unigram” for 1-gram,
“bigram” for 2-gram, and “trigram” for 3-gram. In an n-gram model, the probability of each
word is dependent only on the n−1 previous words; that is:
P(w j |w1:j−1) = P(w j |w j−n+1:j−1)
P(w1:N) =
N
∏
j=1
P(w j |w j−n+1:j−1).
N-gram models work well for classifying newspaper sections, as well as for other classiﬁ-
cation tasks such as spam detection (distinguishing spam email from non-spam), sentiment
Spam detection
analysis (classifying a movie or product review as positive or negative) and author attribu-
Sentiment analysis
tion (Hemingway has a different style and vocabulary than Faulkner or Shakespeare).
Author attribution
24.1.3 Other n-gram models
An alternative to an n-gram word model is a character-level model in which the probability
Character-level
model
of each character is determined by the n −1 previous characters. This approach is helpful
for dealing with unknown words, and for languages that tend to run words together, as in the
Danish word “Speciallægepraksisplanlægningsstabiliseringsperiode.”
Character-level models are well suited for the task of language identiﬁcation: given a
Language
identiﬁcation
text, determine what language it is written in. Even with very short texts such as “Hello,
world” or “Wie geht’s dir,” n-gram letter models can identify the ﬁrst as English and the sec-
ond as German, generally achieving accuracy greater than 99%. (Closely related languages
such as Swedish and Norwegian are more difﬁcult to distinguish and require longer samples;
there, accuracy is in the 95% range.) Character models are good at certain classiﬁcation tasks,
such as deciding that “dextroamphetamine” is a drug name, “Kallenberger” is a person name,
and “Plattsburg” is a city name, even if we have never seen these words before.
Another possibility is the skip-gram model, in which we count words that are near each
Skip-gram
other, but skip a word (or more) between them. For example, given the French text “je
ne comprends pas” the 1-skip-bigrams are “je comprends,” and “ne pas.” Gathering these


878
Chapter 24
Natural Language Processing
helps create a better model of French, because it tells us about conjugation (“je” goes with
“comprends,” not “comprend”) and negation (“ne” goes with “pas”); we wouldn’t get that
from regular bigrams alone.
24.1.4 Smoothing n-gram models
High-frequency n-grams like “of the” have high counts in the training corpus, so their proba-
bility estimate is likely to be accurate: with a different training corpus we would get a similar
estimate. Low-frequency n-grams have low counts that are subject to random noise—they
have high variance. Our models will perform better if we can smooth out that variance.
Furthermore, there is always a chance that we will be asked to evaluate a text containing
an unknown or out-of-vocabulary word: one that never appeared in the training corpus. But
Out-of-vocabulary
it would be a mistake to assign such a word a probability of zero, because then the probability
of the whole sentence, P(w1:N), would be zero.
One way to model unknown words is to modify the training corpus by replacing infre-
quent words with a special symbol, traditionally <UNK>. We could decide in advance to
keep only, say, the 50,000 most common words, or all words with frequency greater than
0.0001%, and replace the others with <UNK>. Then compute n-gram counts for the corpus
as usual, treating <UNK> just like any other word. When an unknown word appears in a test
set, we look up its probability under <UNK>. Sometimes different unknown-word symbols
are used for different types. For example, a string of digits might be replaced with <NUM>, or
an email address with <EMAIL>. (We note that it is also advisable to have a special symbol,
such as <S>, to mark the start (and stop) of a text. That way, when the formula for bigram
probabilities asks for the word before the ﬁrst word, the answer is <S>, not an error.)
Even after we’ve handled unknown words, we have the problem of unseen n-grams. For
example, a test text might contain the phrase “colorless aquamarine ideas,” three words that
we may have seen individually in the training corpus, but never in that exact order. The prob-
lem is that some low-probability n-grams appear in the training corpus, while other equally
low-probability n-grams happen to not appear at all. We don’t want some of them to have a
zero probability while others have a small positive probability; we want to apply smoothing
Smoothing
to all the similar n-grams—reserving some of the probability mass of the model for never-
seen n-grams, to reduce the variance of the model.
The simplest type of smoothing was suggested by Pierre-Simon Laplace in the 18th
century to estimate the probability of rare events, such as the sun failing to rise tomorrow.
Laplace’s (incorrect) theory of the solar system suggested it was about N = 2 million days
old. Going by the data, there were zero out of two million days when the sun failed to rise, yet
we don’t want to say that the probability is exactly zero. Laplace showed that if we adopt a
uniform prior, and combine that with the evidence so far, we get a best estimate of 1/(N +2)
for the probability of the sun’s failure to rise tomorrow—either it will or it won’t (that’s the 2
in the denominator) and a uniform prior says it is as likely as not (that’s the 1 in the numera-
tor). Laplace smoothing (also called add-one smoothing) is a step in the right direction, but
for many natural language applications it performs poorly.
Another choice is a backoff model, in which we start by estimating n-gram counts, but
Backoﬀmodel
for any particular sequence that has a low (or zero) count, we back off to (n −1)-grams.
Linear interpolation smoothing is a backoff model that combines trigram, bigram, and
Linear interpolation
smoothing


Section 24.1
Language Models
879
unigram models by linear interpolation. It deﬁnes the probability estimate as
ˆP(ci|ci−2:i−1) = λ3P(ci|ci−2:i−1)+λ2P(ci|ci−1)+λ1P(ci),
where λ3 +λ2 +λ1 =1. The parameter values λi can be ﬁxed, or they can be trained with an
expectation–maximization algorithm. It is also possible to have the values of λi depend on
the counts: if we have a high count of trigrams, then we weigh them relatively more; if only
a low count, then we put more weight on the bigram and unigram models.
One camp of researchers has developed ever more sophisticated smoothing techniques
(such as Witten-Bell and Kneser-Ney), while another camp suggests gathering a larger corpus
so that even simple smoothing techniques work well (one such approach is called “stupid
backoff”). Both are getting at the same goal: reducing the variance in the language model.
24.1.5 Word representations
N-grams can give us a model that accurately predicts the probability of word sequences,
telling us that, for example, “a black cat” is a more likely English phrase than “cat black a”
because “a black cat” appears in about 0.000014% of the trigrams in a training corpus, while
“cat black a” does not appear at all. Everything that the n-gram word model knows, it learned
from counts of speciﬁc word sequences.
But a native speaker of English would tell a different story: “a black cat” is valid because
it follows a familiar pattern (article-adjective-noun), while “cat black a” does not.
Now consider the phrase “the fulvous kitten.” An English speaker could recognize this
as also following the article-adjective-noun pattern (even a speaker who does not know that
“fulvous” means “brownish yellow” could recognize that almost all words that end in “-ous”
are adjectives). Furthermore, the speaker would recognize the close syntactic connection
between “a” and “the,” as well as the close semantic relation between “cat” and “kitten.”
Thus, the appearance of “a black cat” in the data is evidence, through generalization, that
“the fulvous kitten” is also valid English.
The n-gram model misses this generalization because it is an atomic model: each word is
an atom, distinct from every other word, with no internal structure. We have seen throughout
this book that factored or structured models allow for more expressive power and better gen-
eralization. We will see in Section 25.1 that a factored model called word embeddings gives
a better ability to generalize.
One type of structured word model is a dictionary, usually constructed through man-
Dictionary
ual labor. For example, WordNet is an open-source, hand-curated dictionary in machine-
WordNet
readable format that has proven useful for many natural language applications1 Below is the
WordNet entry for “kitten:”
"kitten" <noun.animal> ("young domestic cat") IS A: young_mammal
"kitten" <verb.body> ("give birth to kittens")
EXAMPLE: "our cat kittened again this year"
WordNet will help you separate the nouns from the verbs, and get the basic categories (a
kitten is a young mammal, which is a mammal, which is an animal), but it won’t tell you the
details of what a kitten looks like or acts like. WordNet will tell you that two subclasses of
cat are Siamese cat and Manx cat, but won’t tell you any more about the breeds.
1
And even computer vision applications: WordNet provides the set of categories used by ImageNet.


