886
Chapter 24
Natural Language Processing
Unfortunately, the grammar overgenerates: that is, it generates sentences that are not gram-
Overgeneration
matical, such as “Me go I.” It also undergenerates: there are many sentences of English that
Undergeneration
it rejects, such as “I think the wumpus is smelly.” We will see how to learn a better grammar
later; for now we concentrate on what we can do with this very simple grammar.
24.2.1 The lexicon of E0
The lexicon, or list of allowable words, is deﬁned in Figure 24.3. Each of the lexical cate-
Lexicon
gories ends in ... to indicate that there are other words in the category. For nouns, names,
verbs, adjectives, and adverbs, it is infeasible even in principle to list all the words. Not only
are there tens of thousands of members in each class, but new ones—like humblebrag or
microbiome—are being added constantly. These ﬁve categories are called open classes. Pro-
Open class
nouns, relative pronouns, articles, prepositions, and conjunctions are called closed classes;
Closed class
they have a small number of words (a dozen or so), and change over the course of centuries,
not months. For example, “thee” and “thou” were commonly used pronouns in the 17th cen-
tury, were on the decline in the 19th century, and are seen today only in poetry and some
regional dialects.
24.3 Parsing
Parsing is the process of analyzing a string of words to uncover its phrase structure, according
Parsing
to the rules of a grammar. We can think of it as a search for a valid parse tree whose leaves
are the words of the string. Figure 24.4 shows that we can start with the S symbol and search
top down, or we can start with the words and search bottom up. Pure top-down or bottom-up
parsing strategies can be inefﬁcient, however, because they can end up repeating effort in
areas of the search space that lead to dead ends. Consider the following two sentences:
Have the students in section 2 of Computer Science 101 take the exam.
Have the students in section 2 of Computer Science 101 taken the exam?
Even though they share the ﬁrst 10 words, these sentences have very different parses, because
the ﬁrst is a command and the second is a question. A left-to-right parsing algorithm would
have to guess whether the ﬁrst word is part of a command or a question and will not be able
to tell if the guess is correct until at least the eleventh word, take or taken. If the algorithm
guesses wrong, it will have to backtrack all the way to the ﬁrst word and reanalyze the whole
sentence under the other interpretation.
To avoid this source of inefﬁciency we can use dynamic programming: every time we
analyze a substring, store the results so we won’t have to reanalyze it later. For example, once
we discover that “the students in section 2 of Computer Science 101” is an NP, we can record
that result in a data structure known as a chart. An algorithm that does this is called a chart
parser. Because we are dealing with context-free grammars, any phrase that was found in
Chart parser
the context of one branch of the search tree can work just as well in any other branch of the
search tree. There are many types of chart parsers; we describe a probabilistic version of a
bottom-up chart parsing algorithm called the CYK algorithm, after its inventors, Ali Cocke,
CYK algorithm
Daniel Younger, and Tadeo Kasami.2
2
Sometimes the authors are credited in the order CKY.


Section 24.3
Parsing
887
List of items
Rule
S
NP VP
S →NP VP
NP VP Adjective
VP →VP Adjective
NP Verb Adjective
VP →Verb
NP Verb dead
Adjective →dead
NP is dead
Verb →is
Article Noun is dead
NP →Article Noun
Article wumpus is dead
Noun →wumpus
the wumpus is dead
Article →the
Figure 24.4 Parsing the string “The wumpus is dead” as a sentence, according to the gram-
mar E0. Viewed as a top-down parse, we start with S, and on each step match one nontermi-
nal X with a rule of the form (X →Y ...) and replace X in the list of items with Y ...; for
example replacing S with the sequence NP VP. Viewed as a bottom-up parse, we start with
the words “the wumpus is dead”, and on each step match a string of tokens such as (Y ...)
against a rule of the form (X →Y ...) and replace the tokens with X; for example replacing
“the” with Article or Article Noun with NP.
The CYK algorithm is shown in Figure 24.5. It requires a grammar with all rules in one
of two very speciﬁc formats: lexical rules of the form X →word [p], and syntactic rules of
the form X →Y Z [p], with exactly two categories on the right-hand side. This grammar
format, called Chomsky Normal Form, may seem restrictive, but it is not: any context-free
Chomsky Normal
Form
grammar can be automatically transformed into Chomsky Normal Form. Exercise 24.CNFX
leads you through the process.
The CYK algorithm uses space of O(n2m) for the P and T tables, where n is the number of
words in the sentence, and m is the number of nonterminal symbols in the grammar, and takes
time O(n3m). If we want an algorithm that is guaranteed to work for all possible context-
free grammars, then we can’t do any better than that. But actually we only want to parse
natural languages, not all possible grammars. Natural languages have evolved to be easy
to understand in real time, not to be as tricky as possible, so it seems that they should be
amenable to a faster parsing algorithm.
To try to get to O(n), we can apply A∗search in a fairly straightforward way: each state is
a list of items (words or categories), as shown in Figure 24.4. The start state is a list of words,
and a goal state is the single item S. The cost of a state is the inverse of its probability as
deﬁned by the rules applied so far, and there are various heuristics to estimate the remaining
distance to the goal; the best heuristics in current use come from machine learning applied to
a corpus of sentences.
With the A∗algorithm we don’t have to search the entire state space, and we are guaran-
teed that the ﬁrst parse found will be the most probable (assuming an admissible heuristic).
This will usually be faster than CYK, but (depending on the details of the grammar) still
slower than O(n). An example result of a parse is shown in Figure 24.6.
Just as with part-of-speech tagging, we can use a beam search for parsing, where at
any time we consider only the b most probable alternative parses. This means we are not


888
Chapter 24
Natural Language Processing
function CYK-PARSE(words,grammar) returns a table of parse trees
inputs: words, a list of words
grammar, a structure with LEXICALRULES and GRAMMARRULES
T ←a table
// T[X, i, k] is most probable X tree spanning wordsi:k
P←a table, initially all 0
// P[X, i, k] is probability of tree T[X, i, k]
// Insert lexical categories for each word.
for i = 1 to LEN(words) do
for each (X, p) in grammar.LEXICALRULES(wordsi) do
P[X, i, i]←p
T[X, i, i]←TREE(X, wordsi)
// Construct Xi:k from Yi:j + Zj+1:k, shortest spans ﬁrst.
for each (i, j, k) in SUBSPANS(LEN(words)) do
for each (X, Y, Z, p) in grammar.GRAMMARRULES do
PYZ ←P[Y, i, j] × P[Z, j+1, k] × p
if PYZ > P[X, i, k] do
P[X, i, k]←PYZ
T[X, i, k]←TREE(X, T[Y, i, j], T[Z, j + 1, k])
return T
function SUBSPANS(N) yields (i, j, k) tuples
for length = 2 to N do
for i = 1 to N + 1 −length do
k←i + length −1
for j = i to k −1 do
yield (i, j, k)
Figure 24.5 The CYK algorithm for parsing. Given a sequence of words, it ﬁnds the most
probable parse tree for the sequence and its subsequences. The table P[X,i,k] gives the prob-
ability of the most probable tree of category X spanning wordsi:k. The output table T[X, i, k]
contains the most probable tree of category X spanning positions i to k inclusive. The func-
tion SUBSPANS returns all tuples (i,j,k) covering a span of wordsi:k, with i ≤j < k, listing the
tuples by increasing length of the i : k span, so that when we go to combine two shorter spans
into a longer one, the shorter spans are already in the table. LEXICALRULES(word) returns a
collection of (X, p) pairs, one for each rule of the form X →word [p], and GRAMMARRULES
gives (X,Y,Z,p) tuples, one for each grammar rule of the form X →Y Z [p].
Article
Noun
wumpus
Verb
NP
VP
S
Every
smells
0.25
0.90
 0.05
 0.15
 0.10
 0.40
Figure 24.6 Parse tree for the sentence “Every wumpus smells” according to the grammar
E0. Each interior node of the tree is labeled with its probability. The probability of the tree as
a whole is 0.9×0.25×0.05×0.15×0.40×0.10=0.0000675. The tree can also be written
in linear form as [S [NP [Article every][Noun wumpus]][VP [Verb smells]]].


