898
Chapter 24
Natural Language Processing
Ambiguity: We tend to think of ambiguity as a failure in communication; when a listener
Ambiguity
is consciously aware of an ambiguity in an utterance, it means that the utterance is unclear or
confusing. Here are some examples taken from newspaper headlines:
Squad helps dog bite victim.
Police begin campaign to run down jaywalkers.
Helicopter powered by human ﬂies.
Once-sagging cloth diaper industry saved by full dumps.
Include your children when baking cookies.
Portable toilet bombed; police have nothing to go on.
Milk drinkers are turning to powder.
Two sisters reunited after 18 years in checkout counter.
Such confusions are the exception; most of the time the language we hear seems unambigu-
ous. Thus, when researchers ﬁrst began to use computers to analyze language in the 1960s,
they were quite surprised to learn that almost every sentence is ambiguous, with multiple
possible parses (sometimes hundreds), even when the single preferred parse is the only one
that native speakers notice. For example, we understand the phrase “brown rice and black
beans” as “[brown rice] and [black beans],” and never consider the low-probability interpre-
tation “brown [rice and black beans],” where the adjective “brown” is modifying the whole
phrase, not just the “rice.” When we hear “Outside of a dog, a book is a person’s best friend,”
we interpret “outside of” as meaning “except for,” and ﬁnd it funny when the next sentence
of the Groucho Marx joke is “Inside of a dog it’s too dark to read.”
Lexical ambiguity is when a word has more than one meaning: “back” can be an adverb
Lexical ambiguity
(go back), an adjective (back door), a noun (the back of the room), a verb (back a candidate),
or a proper noun (a river in Nunavut, Canada). “Jack” can be a proper name, a noun (a playing
card, a six-pointed metal game piece, a nautical ﬂag, a ﬁsh, a bird, a cheese, a socket, etc.), or
a verb (to jack up a car, to hunt with a light, or to hit a baseball hard). Syntactic ambiguity
Syntactic ambiguity
refers to a phrase that has multiple parses: “I smelled a wumpus in 2,2” has two parses: one
where the prepositional phrase “in 2,2” modiﬁes the noun and one where it modiﬁes the verb.
The syntactic ambiguity leads to a semantic ambiguity, because one parse means that the
Semantic ambiguity
wumpus is in 2,2 and the other means that a stench is in 2,2. In this case, getting the wrong
interpretation could be a deadly mistake.
There can also be ambiguity between literal and ﬁgurative meanings. Figures of speech
are important in poetry, and are common in everyday speech as well. A metonymy is a
Metonymy
ﬁgure of speech in which one object is used to stand for another. When we hear “Chrysler
announced a new model,” we do not interpret it as saying that companies can talk; rather
we understand that a spokesperson for the company made the announcement. Metonymy is
common and is often interpreted unconsciously by human hearers.
Unfortunately, our grammar as it is written is not so facile. To handle the semantics of
metonymy properly, we need to introduce a whole new level of ambiguity. We could do
this by providing two objects for the semantic interpretation of every phrase in the sentence:
one for the object that the phrase literally refers to (Chrysler) and one for the metonymic
reference (the spokesperson). We then have to say that there is a relation between the two. In


Section 24.5
Complications of Real Natural Language
899
our current grammar, “Chrysler announced” gets interpreted as
x = Chrysler ∧e ∈Announce(x)∧After(Now,Extent(e)).
We need to change that to
x = Chrysler ∧e ∈Announce(m)∧After(Now,Extent(e))
∧Metonymy(m,x).
This says that there is one entity x that is equal to Chrysler, and another entity m that did the
announcing, and that the two are in a metonymy relation. The next step is to deﬁne what
kinds of metonymy relations can occur. The simplest case is when there is no metonymy at
all—the literal object x and the metonymic object m are identical:
∀m,x (m = x) ⇒Metonymy(m,x).
For the Chrysler example, a reasonable generalization is that an organization can be used to
stand for a spokesperson of that organization:
∀m,x x∈Organizations∧Spokesperson(m,x) ⇒Metonymy(m,x).
Other metonymies include the author for the works (I read Shakespeare) or more generally
the producer for the product (I drive a Honda) and the part for the whole (The Red Sox need
a strong arm). Some examples of metonymy, such as “The ham sandwich on Table 4 wants
another beer,” are more novel and are interpreted with respect to a situation (such as waiting
on tables and not knowing a customer’s name).
A metaphor is another ﬁgure of speech, in which a phrase with one literal meaning is
Metaphor
used to suggest a different meaning by way of an analogy. Thus, metaphor can be seen as a
kind of metonymy where the relation is one of similarity.
Disambiguation is the process of recovering the most probable intended meaning of an
Disambiguation
utterance. In one sense we already have a framework for solving this problem: each rule
has a probability associated with it, so the probability of an interpretation is the product of
the probabilities of the rules that led to the interpretation. Unfortunately, the probabilities
reﬂect how common the phrases are in the corpus from which the grammar was learned,
and thus reﬂect general knowledge, not speciﬁc knowledge of the current situation. To do
disambiguation properly, we need to combine four models:
1. The world model: the likelihood that a proposition occurs in the world. Given what we
know about the world, it is more likely that a speaker who says “I’m dead” means “I
am in big trouble” or “I lost this video game” rather than “My life ended, and yet I can
still talk.”
2. The mental model: the likelihood that the speaker forms the intention of communicat-
ing a certain fact to the hearer. This approach combines models of what the speaker
believes, what the speaker believes the hearer believes, and so on. For example, when
a politician says, “I am not a crook,” the world model might assign a probability of
only 50% to the proposition that the politician is not a criminal, and 99.999% to the
proposition that he is not a hooked shepherd’s staff. Nevertheless, we select the former
interpretation because it is a more likely thing to say.
3. The language model: the likelihood that a certain string of words will be chosen, given
that the speaker has the intention of communicating a certain fact.


900
Chapter 24
Natural Language Processing
4. The acoustic model: for spoken communication, the likelihood that a particular se-
quence of sounds will be generated, given that the speaker has chosen a given string
of words. (For handwritten or typed communication, we have the problem of optical
character recognition.)
24.6 Natural Language Tasks
Natural language processing is a big ﬁeld, deserving an entire textbook or two of its own
(Goldberg, 2017; Jurafsky and Martin, 2020). In this section we brieﬂy describe some of the
main tasks; you can use the references to get more details.
Speech recognition is the task of transforming spoken sound into text. We can then
Speech recognition
perform further tasks (such as question answering) on the resulting text. Current systems
have a word error rate of about 3% to 5% (depending on details of the test set), similar
to human transcribers. The challenge for a system using speech recognition is to respond
appropriately even when there are errors on individual words.
Top systems today use a combination of recurrent neural networks and hidden Markov
models (Hinton et al., 2012; Yu and Deng, 2016; Deng, 2016; Chiu et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2017). The introduction of deep neural nets for speech in 2011 led to an immediate and
dramatic improvement of about 30% in error rate—this from a ﬁeld that seemed to be mature
and was previously progressing at only a few percent per year. Deep neural networks are a
good ﬁt because the problem of speech recognition has a natural compositional breakdown:
waveforms to phonemes to words to sentences. They will be covered in the next chapter.
Text-to-speech synthesis is the inverse process—going from text to sound. Taylor (2009)
Text-to-speech
gives a book-length overview. The challenge is to pronounce each word correctly, and to make
the ﬂow of each sentence seem natural, with the right pauses and emphasis.
Another area of development is in synthesizing different voices—starting with a choice
between a generic male or female voice, then allowing for regional dialects, and even imi-
tating celebrity voices. As with speech recognition, the introduction of deep recurrent neu-
ral networks led to a large improvement, with about 2/3 of listeners saying that the neural
WaveNet system (van den Oord et al., 2016a) sounded more natural than the previous non-
neural system.
Machine translation transforms text in one language to another. Systems are usually
trained using a bilingual corpus: a set of paired documents, where one member of the pair is
in, say, English, and the other is in, say, French. The documents do not need to be annotated
in any way; the machine translation system learns to align sentences and phrases and then
when presented with a novel sentence in one language, can generate a translation to the other.
Systems in the early 2000s used n-gram models, and achieved results that were usually
good enough to get across the meaning of a text, but contained syntactic errors in most sen-
tences. One problem was the limit on the length of the n-grams: even with a large limit of
7, it was difﬁcult for information to ﬂow from one end of the sentence to the other. Another
problem was that all the information in an n-gram model is at the level of individual words.
Such a system could learn that “black cat” translates to “chat noir,” but it could not learn the
rule that adjectives generally come before the noun in English and after the noun in French.
Recurrent neural sequence-to-sequence models (Sutskever et al., 2015) got around the
problem. They could generalize better (because they could use word embeddings rather than


