962
Chapter 26
Robotics
In this section, we are looking more directly at the underlying MDP the robot works
in. We’re switching from the familiar discrete MDPs to continuous ones. We will denote
our dynamic state of the world by x, as is common practice—the equivalent of s in discrete
MDPs. Let xs and xg be the starting and goal states.
We want to ﬁnd a sequence of actions that, when executed by the robot, result in state-
action pairs with low cumulative cost. The actions are torques which we denote with u(t)
for t starting at 0 and ending at T. Formally, we want to ﬁnd the sequence of torques u that
minimize a cumulative cost J:
min
u
R T
0 J(x(t),u(t))dt
(26.7)
subject to the constraints
∀t, ˙x(t) = f(x(t),u(t))
x(0) = xs, x(T) = xg .
How is this connected to motion planning and trajectory tracking control? Well, imagine
we take the notion of efﬁciency and clearance away from the obstacles and put it into the cost
function J, just as we did before in trajectory optimization over kinematic state. The dynamic
state is the conﬁguration and velocity, and torques u change it via the dynamics f from open-
loop trajectory tracking. The difference is that now we’re thinking about the conﬁgurations
and the torques at the same time. Sometimes, we might want to treat collision avoidance as a
hard constraint as well, something we’ve also mentioned before when we looked at trajectory
optimization for the kinematic state only.
To solve this optimization problem, we can take gradients of J—not with respect to the
sequence τ of conﬁgurations anymore, but directly with respect to the controls u. It is some-
times helpful to include the state sequence x as a decision variable too, and use the dynamics
constraints to ensure that x and u are consistent. There are various trajectory optimization
techniques using this approach; two of them go by the names multiple shooting and direct
collocation. None of these techniques will ﬁnd the global optimal solution, but in practice
they can effectively make humanoid robots walk and make autonomous cars drive.
Magic happens when in the problem above, J is quadratic and f is linear in x and u. We
want to minimize
min
Z ∞
0 xTQx+uTRudt
subject to
∀t, ˙x(t) = Ax(t)+Bu(t).
We can optimize over an inﬁnite horizon rather than a ﬁnite one, and we obtain a policy
from any state rather than just a sequence of controls. Q and R need to be positive deﬁnite
matrices for this to work. This gives us the linear quadratic regulator (LQR). With LQR,
Linear quadratic
regulator (LQR)
the optimal value function (called cost to go) is quadratic, and the optimal policy is linear.
The policy looks like u = −Kx, where ﬁnding the matrix K requires solving an algebraic
Riccati equation—no local optimization, no value iteration, no policy iteration are needed!
Riccati equation
Because of the ease of ﬁnding the optimal policy, LQR ﬁnds many uses in practice de-
spite the fact that real problems seldom actually have quadratic costs and linear dynamics. A
really useful method is called iterative LQR (ILQR), which works by starting with a solu-
Iterative LQR
(ILQR)
tion and then iteratively computing a linear approximation of the dynamics and a quadratic
approximation of the cost around it, then solving the resulting LQR system to arrive at a new
solution. Variants of LQR are also often used for trajectory tracking.


Section 26.6
Planning Uncertain Movements
963
26.6 Planning Uncertain Movements
In robotics, uncertainty arises from partial observability of the environment and from the
stochastic (or unmodeled) effects of the robot’s actions. Errors can also arise from the use
of approximation algorithms such as particle ﬁltering, which does not give the robot an exact
belief state even if the environment is modeled perfectly.
The majority of today’s robots use deterministic algorithms for decision making, such
as the path-planning algorithms of the previous section, or the search algorithms that were
introduced in Chapter 3. These deterministic algorithms are adapted in two ways: ﬁrst, they
deal with the continuous state space by turning it into a discrete space (for example with
visibility graphs or cell decomposition). Second, they deal with uncertainty in the current
state by choosing the most likely state from the probability distribution produced by the
Most likely state
state estimation algorithm. That approach makes the computation faster and makes a better
ﬁt for the deterministic search algorithms. In this section we discuss methods for dealing with
uncertainty that are analogous to the more complex search algorithms covered in Chapter 4.
First, instead of deterministic plans, uncertainty calls for policies. We already discussed
how trajectory tracking control turns a plan into a policy to compensate for errors in dynamics.
Sometimes though, if the most likely hypothesis changes enough, tracking the plan designed
for a different hypothesis is too suboptimal. This is where online replanning comes in: we
Online replanning
can recompute a new plan based on the new belief. Many robots today use a technique called
model predictive control (MPC), where they plan for a shorter time horizon, but replan
Model predictive
control (MPC)
at every time step. (MPC is therefore closely related to real-time search and game-playing
algorithms.) This effectively results in a policy: at every step, we run a planner and take the
ﬁrst action in the plan; if new information comes along, or we end up not where we expected,
that’s OK, because we are going to replan anyway and that will tell us what to do next.
Second, uncertainty calls for information gathering actions. When we consider only the
information we have and make a plan based on it (this is called separating estimation from
control), we are effectively solving (approximately) a new MDP at every step, corresponding
to our current belief about where we are or how the world works. But in reality, uncertainty is
better captured by the POMDP framework: there is something we don’t directly observe, be
it the robot’s location or conﬁguration, the location of objects in the world, or the parameters
of the dynamics model itself—for example, where exactly is the center of mass of link two
on this arm?
What we lose when we don’t solve the POMDP is the ability to reason about future
information the robot will get: in MDPs we only plan with what we know, not with what we
might eventually know. Remember the value of information? Well, robots that plan using
their current belief as if they will never ﬁnd out anything more fail to account for the value of
information. They will never take actions that seem suboptimal right now according to what
they know, but that will actually result in a lot of information and enable the robot to do well.
What does such an action look like for a navigation robot? The robot could get close
to a landmark to get a better estimate of where it is, even if that landmark is out of the way
according to what it currently knows. This action is optimal only if the robot considers the
new observations it will get, as opposed to looking only at the information it already has.
To get around this, robotics techniques sometimes deﬁne information gathering actions
explicitly—such as moving a hand until it touches a surface (called guarded movements)—
Guarded movement


964
Chapter 26
Robotics
v
Cv
motion
envelope
initial
configuration
Figure 26.23 A two-dimensional environment, velocity uncertainty cone, and envelope of
possible robot motions. The intended velocity is v, but with uncertainty the actual velocity
could be anywhere in Cv, resulting in a ﬁnal conﬁguration somewhere in the motion envelope,
which means we wouldn’t know if we hit the hole or not.
and make sure the robot does that before coming up with a plan for reaching its actual goal.
Each guarded motion consists of (1) a motion command and (2) a termination condition,
which is a predicate on the robot’s sensor values saying when to stop.
Sometimes, the goal itself could be reached via a sequence of guarded moves guaranteed
to succeed regardless of uncertainty. As an example, Figure 26.23 shows a two-dimensional
conﬁguration space with a narrow vertical hole. It could be the conﬁguration space for inser-
tion of a rectangular peg into a hole or a car key into the ignition. The motion commands are
constant velocities. The termination conditions are contact with a surface. To model uncer-
tainty in control, we assume that instead of moving in the commanded direction, the robot’s
actual motion lies in the cone Cv about it.
The ﬁgure shows what would happen if the robot attempted to move straight down from
the initial conﬁguration. Because of the uncertainty in velocity, the robot could move any-
where in the conical envelope, possibly going into the hole, but more likely landing to one
side of it. Because the robot would not then know which side of the hole it was on, it would
not know which way to move.
A more sensible strategy is shown in Figures 26.24 and 26.25. In Figure 26.24, the robot
deliberately moves to one side of the hole. The motion command is shown in the ﬁgure,
and the termination test is contact with any surface. In Figure 26.25, a motion command is
given that causes the robot to slide along the surface and into the hole. Because all possible
velocities in the motion envelope are to the right, the robot will slide to the right whenever it
is in contact with a horizontal surface.
It will slide down the right-hand vertical edge of the hole when it touches it, because
all possible velocities are down relative to a vertical surface. It will keep moving until it
reaches the bottom of the hole, because that is its termination condition. In spite of the
control uncertainty, all possible trajectories of the robot terminate in contact with the bottom
of the hole—that is, unless surface irregularities cause the robot to stick in one place.
Other techniques beyond guarded movements change the cost function to incentivize ac-
tions we know will lead to information—like the coastal navigation heuristic which requires
Coastal navigation
the robot to stay near known landmarks. More generally, techniques can incorporate the ex-
pected information gain (reduction of entropy of the belief) as a term in the cost function,


Section 26.7
Reinforcement Learning in Robotics
965
v
Cv
motion
envelope
initial
conﬁguration
Figure 26.24 The ﬁrst motion command and the resulting envelope of possible robot mo-
tions. No matter what actual motion ensues, we know the ﬁnal conﬁguration will be to the
left of the hole.
v
Cv
motion
envelope
Figure 26.25 The second motion command and the envelope of possible motions. Even with
error, we will eventually get into the hole.
leading to the robot explicitly reasoning about how much information each action might bring
when deciding what to do. While more difﬁcult computationally, such approaches have the
advantage that the robot invents its own information gathering actions rather than relying on
human-provided heuristics and scripted strategies that often lack ﬂexibility.
26.7 Reinforcement Learning in Robotics
Thus far we have considered tasks in which the robot has access to the dynamics model of
the world. In many tasks, it is very difﬁcult to write down such a model, which puts us in the
domain of reinforcement learning (RL).
One challenge of RL in robotics is the continuous nature of the state and action spaces,
which we handle either through discretization, or, more commonly, through function approxi-
mation. Policies or value functions are represented as combinations of known useful features,
or as deep neural networks. Neural nets can map from raw inputs directly to outputs, and thus
largely avoid the need for feature engineering, but they do require more data.
A bigger challenge is that robots operate in the real world. We have seen how reinforce-
ment learning can be used to learn to play chess or Go by playing simulated games. But when
a real robot moves in the real world, we have to make sure that its actions are safe (things


966
Chapter 26
Robotics
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 26.26 Training a robust policy. (a) Multiple simulations are run of a robot hand ma-
nipulating objects, with different randomized parameters for physics and lighting. Courtesy
of Wojciech Zaremba. (b) The real-world environment, with a single robot hand in the center
of a cage, surrounded by cameras and range ﬁnders. (c) Simulation and real-world train-
ing yields multiple different policies for grasping objects; here a pinch grasp and a quadpod
grasp. Courtesy of OpenAI. See Andrychowicz et al. (2018a).
break!), and we have to accept that progress will be slower than in a simulation because the
world refuses to move faster than one second per second. Much of what is interesting about
using reinforcement learning in robotics boils down to how we might reduce the real world
sample complexity—the number of interactions with the physical world that the robot needs
before it has learned how to do the task.
26.7.1 Exploiting models
A natural way to avoid the need for many real-world samples is to use as much knowledge
of the world’s dynamics as possible. For instance, we might not know exactly what the
coefﬁcient of friction or the mass of an object is, but we might have equations that describe
the dynamics as a function of these parameters.
In such a case, model-based reinforcement learning (Chapter 23) is appealing, where
the robot can alternate between ﬁtting the dynamics parameters and computing a better pol-
icy. Even if the equations are incorrect because they fail to model every detail of physics,
researchers have experimented with learning an error term, in addition to the parameters, that
can compensate for the inaccuracy of the physical model. Or, we can abandon the equations
and instead ﬁt locally linear models of the world that each approximate the dynamics in a
region of the state space, an approach that has been successful in getting robots to master
complex dynamic tasks like juggling.
A model of the world can also be useful in reducing the sample complexity of model-free
reinforcement learning methods by doing sim-to-real transfer: transferring policies that work
Sim-to-real


Section 26.7
Reinforcement Learning in Robotics
967
in simulation to the real world. The idea is to use the model as a simulator for a policy search
(Section 23.5). To learn a policy that transfers well, we can add noise to the model during
training, thereby making the policy more robust. Or, we can train policies that will work
with a variety of models by sampling different parameters in the simulations—sometimes
referred to as domain randomization. An example is in Figure 26.26, where a dexterous
Domain
randomization
manipulation task is trained in simulation by varying visual attributes, as well as physical
attributes like friction or damping.
Finally, hybrid approaches that borrow ideas from both model-based and model-free al-
gorithms are meant to give us the best of both. The hybrid approach originated with the Dyna
architecture, where the idea was to iterate between acting and improving the policy, but the
policy improvement would come in two complementary ways: 1) the standard model-free
way of using the experience to directly update the policy, and 2) the model-based way of
using the experience to ﬁt a model, then plan with it to generate a policy.
More recent techniques have experimented with ﬁtting local models, planning with them
to generate actions, and using these actions as supervision to ﬁt a policy, then iterating to get
better and better models around the areas that the policy needs. This has been successfully
applied in end-to-end learning, where the policy takes pixels as input and directly outputs
torques as actions—it enabled the ﬁrst demonstration of deep RL on physical robots.
Models can also be exploited for the purpose of ensuring safe exploration. Learning
slowly but safely may be better than learning quickly but crashing and burning half way
through. So arguably, more important than reducing real-world samples is reducing real-
world samples in dangerous states—we don’t want robots falling off cliffs, and we don’t
want them breaking our favorite mugs or, even worse, colliding with objects and people. An
approximate model, with uncertainty associated to it (for example by considering a range of
values for its parameters), can guide exploration and impose constraints on the actions that
the robot is allowed to take in order to avoid these dangerous states. This is an active area of
research in robotics and control.
26.7.2 Exploiting other information
Models are useful, but there is more we can do to further reduce sample complexity.
When setting up a reinforcement learning problem, we have to select the state and action
spaces, the representation of the policy or value function, and the reward function we’re using.
These decisions have a large impact on how easy or how hard we are making the problem.
One approach is to use higher-level motion primitives instead of low-level actions like
Motion primitive
torque commands. A motion primitive is a parameterized skill that the robot has. For exam-
ple, a robotic soccer player might have the skill of “pass the ball to the player at (x,y).” All
the policy needs to do is to ﬁgure out how to combine them and set their parameters, instead
of reinventing them. This approach often learns much faster than low-level approaches, but
does restrict the space of possible behaviors that the robot can learn.
Another way to reduce the number of real-world samples required for learning is to reuse
information from previous learning episodes on other tasks, rather than starting from scratch.
This falls under the umbrella of metalearning or transfer learning.
Finally, people are a great source of information. In the next section, we talk about how
to interact with people, and part of it is how to use their actions to guide the robot’s learning.


