974
Chapter 26
Robotics
Figure 26.30 A human teacher pushes the robot down to teach it to stay closer to the ta-
ble. The robot appropriately updates its understanding of the desired cost function and starts
optimizing it. Courtesy of Anca Dragan. See Bajcsy et al. (2017).
Figure 26.31 A programming interface that involves placing specially designed blocks in
the robot’s workspace to select objects and specify high-level actions. Images courtesy of
Maya Cakmak. See Seﬁdgar et al. (2017).
The ALVINN autonomous car project used this approach, and found that even when
starting from a state in D, π will make small errors, which will take the car off the demon-
strated trajectory. There, π will make a larger error, which will take the car even further off
the desired course.
We can address this at training time if we interleave collecting labels and learning: start
with a demonstration, learn a policy, then roll out that policy and ask the human for what
action to take at every state along the way, then repeat. The robot then learns how to correct
its mistakes as it deviates from the human’s desired actions.
Alternatively, we can address it by leveraging reinforcement learning. The robot can ﬁt a
dynamics model based on the demonstrations, and then use optimal control (Section 26.5.4)
to generate a policy that optimizes for staying close to the demonstration. A version of this
has been used to perform very challenging maneuvers at an expert level in a small radio-
controlled helicopter (see Figure 23.9(b)).
The DAGGER (Data Aggregation) system starts with a human expert demonstration.
From that it learns a policy, π1 and uses the policy to generate a data set D. Then from
D it generates a new policy π2 that best imitates the original human data. This repeats, and


Section 26.9
Alternative Robotic Frameworks
975
on the nth iteration it uses πn to generate more data, to be added to D, which is then used to
create πn+1. In other words, at each iteration the system gathers new data under the current
policy and trains the next policy using all the data gathered so far.
Related recent techniques use adversarial training: they alternate between training a
classiﬁer to distinguish between the robot’s learned policy and the human’s demonstrations,
and training a new robot policy via reinforcement learning to fool the classiﬁer. These ad-
vances enable the robot to handle states that are near demonstrations, but generalization to
far-off states or to new dynamics is a work in progress.
Teaching interfaces and the correspondence problem. So far, we have imagined the
case of an autonomous car or an autonomous helicopter, for which human demonstrations use
the same actions that the robot can take itself: accelerating, braking, and steering. But what
happens if we do this for tasks like cleaning up the kitchen table? We have two choices here:
either the person demonstrates using their own body while the robot watches, or the person
physically guides the robot’s effectors.
The ﬁrst approach is appealing because it comes naturally to end users. Unfortunately,
it suffers from the correspondence problem: how to map human actions onto robot actions.
Correspondence
problem
People have different kinematics and dynamics than robots. Not only does that make it dif-
ﬁcult to translate or retarget human motion onto robot motion (e.g., retargeting a ﬁve-ﬁnger
human grasp to a two-ﬁnger robot grasp), but often the high-level strategy a person might use
is not appropriate for the robot.
The second approach, where the human teacher moves the robot’s effectors into the right
positions, is called kinesthetic teaching. It is not easy for humans to teach this way, espe-
Kinesthetic teaching
cially to teach robots with multiple joints. The teacher needs to coordinate all the degrees of
freedom as it is guiding the arm through the task. Researchers have thus investigated alter-
natives, like demonstrating keyframes as opposed to continuous trajectories, as well as the
Keyframe
use of visual programming to enable end users to program primitives for a task rather than
Visual programming
demonstrate from scratch (Figure 26.31). Sometimes both approaches are combined.
26.9 Alternative Robotic Frameworks
Thus far, we have taken a view of robotics based on the notion of deﬁning or learning a
reward function, and having the robot optimize that reward function (be it via planning or
learning), sometimes in coordination or collaboration with humans. This is a deliberative
Deliberative
view of robotics, to be contrasted with a reactive view.
Reactive
26.9.1 Reactive controllers
In some cases, it is easier to set up a good policy for a robot than to model the world and plan.
Then, instead of a rational agent, we have a reﬂex agent.
For example, picture a legged robot that attempts to lift a leg over an obstacle. We could
give this robot a rule that says lift the leg a small height h and move it forward, and if the leg
encounters an obstacle, move it back and start again at a higher height. You could say that h
is modeling an aspect of the world, but we can also think of h as an auxiliary variable of the
robot controller, devoid of direct physical meaning.
One such example is the six-legged (hexapod) robot, shown in Figure 26.32(a), designed
for walking through rough terrain. The robot’s sensors are inadequate to obtain accurate


976
Chapter 26
Robotics
S1
S2
S4
S3
push backward
lift up
set down
retract, lift higher
move
forward
no
yes
stuck?
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.32 (a) Genghis, a hexapod robot. (Image courtesy of Rodney A. Brooks.) (b) An
augmented ﬁnite state machine (AFSM) that controls one leg. The AFSM reacts to sensor
feedback: if a leg is stuck during the forward swinging phase, it will be lifted increasingly
higher.
models of the terrain for path planning. Moreover, even if we added high-precision cameras
and rangeﬁnders, the 12 degrees of freedom (two for each leg) would render the resulting
path planning problem computationally difﬁcult.
It is possible, nonetheless, to specify a controller directly without an explicit environ-
mental model. (We have already seen this with the PD controller, which was able to keep a
complex robot arm on target without an explicit model of the robot dynamics.)
For the hexapod robot we ﬁrst choose a gait, or pattern of movement of the limbs. One
Gait
statically stable gait is to ﬁrst move the right front, right rear, and left center legs forward
(keeping the other three ﬁxed), and then move the other three. This gait works well on
ﬂat terrain. On rugged terrain, obstacles may prevent a leg from swinging forward. This
problem can be overcome by a remarkably simple control rule: when a leg’s forward motion
is blocked, simply retract it, lift it higher, and try again. The resulting controller is shown in
Figure 26.32(b) as a simple ﬁnite state machine; it constitutes a reﬂex agent with state, where
the internal state is represented by the index of the current machine state (s1 through s4).
26.9.2 Subsumption architectures
The subsumption architecture (Brooks, 1986) is a framework for assembling reactive con-
Subsumption
architecture
trollers out of ﬁnite state machines. Nodes in these machines may contain tests for certain
sensor variables, in which case the execution trace of a ﬁnite state machine is conditioned
on the outcome of such a test. Arcs can be tagged with messages that will be generated
when traversing them, and that are sent to the robot’s motors or to other ﬁnite state machines.
Additionally, ﬁnite state machines possess internal timers (clocks) that control the time it
takes to traverse an arc. The resulting machines are called augmented ﬁnite state machines
(AFSMs), where the augmentation refers to the use of clocks.
Augmented ﬁnite
state machine
(AFSM)
An example of a simple AFSM is the four-state machine we just talked about, shown in
Figure 26.32(b). This AFSM implements a cyclic controller, whose execution mostly does
not rely on environmental feedback. The forward swing phase, however, does rely on sensor
feedback. If the leg is stuck, meaning that it has failed to execute the forward swing, the


Section 26.9
Alternative Robotic Frameworks
977
robot retracts the leg, lifts it up a little higher, and attempts to execute the forward swing once
again. Thus, the controller is able to react to contingencies arising from the interplay of the
robot and its environment.
The subsumption architecture offers additional primitives for synchronizing AFSMs, and
for combining output values of multiple, possibly conﬂicting AFSMs. In this way, it enables
the programmer to compose increasingly complex controllers in a bottom-up fashion. In
our example, we might begin with AFSMs for individual legs, followed by an AFSM for
coordinating multiple legs. On top of this, we might implement higher-level behaviors such
as collision avoidance, which might involve backing up and turning.
The idea of composing robot controllers from AFSMs is quite intriguing. Imagine how
difﬁcult it would be to generate the same behavior with any of the conﬁguration-space path-
planning algorithms described in the previous section. First, we would need an accurate
model of the terrain. The conﬁguration space of a robot with six legs, each of which is driven
by two independent motors, totals 18 dimensions (12 dimensions for the conﬁguration of the
legs, and six for the location and orientation of the robot relative to its environment). Even
if our computers were fast enough to ﬁnd paths in such high-dimensional spaces, we would
have to worry about nasty effects such as the robot sliding down a slope.
Because of such stochastic effects, a single path through conﬁguration space would al-
most certainly be too brittle, and even a PID controller might not be able to cope with such
contingencies. In other words, generating motion behavior deliberately is simply too complex
a problem in some cases for present-day robot motion planning algorithms.
Unfortunately, the subsumption architecture has its own problems. First, the AFSMs
are driven by raw sensor input, an arrangement that works if the sensor data is reliable and
contains all necessary information for decision making, but fails if sensor data has to be
integrated in nontrivial ways over time. Subsumption-style controllers have therefore mostly
been applied to simple tasks, such as following a wall or moving toward visible light sources.
Second, the lack of deliberation makes it difﬁcult to change the robot’s goals. A robot
with a subsumption architecture usually does just one task, and it has no notion of how to
modify its controls to accommodate different goals (just like the dung beetle on page 59).
Third, in many real-world problems, the policy we want is often too complex to encode
explicitly. Think about the example from Figure 26.28, of an autonomous car needing to
negotiate a lane change with a human driver. We might start off with a simple policy that
goes into the target lane. But when we test the car, we ﬁnd out that not every driver in the
target lane will slow down to let the car in. We might then add a bit more complexity: make
the car nudge towards the target lane, wait for a response form the driver in that lane, and
then either proceed or retreat back. But then we test the car, and realize that the nudging
needs to happen at a different speed depending on the speed of the vehicle in the target lane,
on whether there is another vehicle in front in the target lane, on whether there is a vehicle
behind the car in the initial, and so on. The number of conditions that we need to consider
to determine the right course of action can be very large, even for such a deceptively simple
maneuver. This in turn presents scalability challenges for subsumption-style architectures.
All that said, robotics is a complex problem with many approaches: deliberative, reactive,
or a mixture thereof; based on physics, cognitive models, data, or a mixture thereof. The right
approach is still a subject for debate, scientiﬁc inquiry, and engineering prowess.


978
Chapter 26
Robotics
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.33 (a) A patient with a brain–machine interface controlling a robot arm to grab a
drink. Image courtesy of Brown University. (b) Roomba, the robot vacuum cleaner. Photo
by HANDOUT/KRT/Newscom.
26.10 Application Domains
Robotic technology is already permeating our world, and has the potential to improve our
independence, health, and productivity. Here are some example applications.
Home care: Robots have started to enter the home to care for older adults and people
with motor impairments, assisting them with activities of daily living and enabling them to
live more independently. These include wheelchairs and wheelchair-mounted arms like the
Kinova arm from Figure 26.1(b). Even though they start off as being operated by a human di-
rectly, these robots are gaining more and more autonomy. On the horizon are robots operated
by brain–machine interfaces, which have been shown to enable people with quadriplegia to
use a robot arm to grasp objects and even feed themselves (Figure 26.33(a)). Related to these
are prosthetic limbs that intelligently respond to our actions, and exoskeletons that give us
superhuman strength or enable people who can’t control their muscles from the waist down
to walk again.
Personal robots are meant to assist us with daily tasks like cleaning and organizing, free-
ing up our time. Although manipulation still has a way to go before it can operate seamlessly
in messy, unstructured human environments, navigation has made some headway. In particu-
lar, many homes already enjoy a mobile robot vacuum cleaner like the one in Figure 26.33(b).
Health care: Robots assist and augment surgeons, enabling more precise, minimally
invasive, safer procedures with better patient outcomes. The Da Vinci surgical robot from
Figure 26.34(a) is now widely deployed at hospitals in the U.S.
Services: Mobile robots help out in ofﬁce buildings, hotels, and hospitals. Savioke has
put robots in hotels delivering products like towels or toothpaste to your room. The Help-
mate and TUG robots carry food and medicine in hospitals (Figure 26.34(b)), while Dili-
gent Robotics’ Moxi robot helps out nurses with back-end logistical responsibilities. Co-Bot
roams the halls of Carnegie Mellon University, ready to guide you to someone’s ofﬁce. We
can also use telepresence robots like the Beam to attend meetings and conferences remotely,
Telepresence robots
or check in on our grandparents.


Section 26.10
Application Domains
979
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.34 (a) Surgical robot in the operating room. Photo by Patrick Landmann/Science
Source. (b) Hospital delivery robot. Photo by Wired.
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.35 (a) Autonomous car BOSS which won the DARPA Urban Challenge. Photo
by Tangi Quemener/AFP/Getty Images/Newscom. Courtesy of Sebastian Thrun. (b) Aerial
view showing the perception and predictions of the Waymo autonomous car (white vehicle
with green track). Other vehicles (blue boxes) and pedestrians (orange boxes) are shown with
anticipated trajectories. Road/sidewalk boundaries are in yellow. Photo courtesy of Waymo.
Autonomous cars: Some of us are occasionally distracted while driving, by cell phone
calls, texts, or other distractions. The sad result: more than a million people die every year in
trafﬁc accidents. Further, many of us spend a lot of time driving and would like to recapture
some of that time. All this has led to a massive ongoing effort to deploy autonomous cars.
Prototypes have existed since the 1980s, but progress was stimulated by the 2005 DARPA
Grand Challenge, an autonomous vehicle race over 200 challenging kilometers of unre-
hearsed desert terrain. Stanford’s Stanley vehicle completed the course in less than seven
hours, winning a $2 million prize and a place in the National Museum of American History.


