944
Chapter 26
Robotics
Xt+1
Xt
μt
Σt
f(Xt, at)
f(μt, at)
Σt+1
Xt+1
Xt
μt
Σt
f(Xt, at)
f(μt, at)
Σt+1
Σt+1
~
f(Xt, at) = f(μt, at) + Ft(Xt − μt)
~
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.8 One-dimensional illustration of a linearized motion model: (a) The function f,
and the projection of a mean µt and a covariance interval (based on Σt) into time t + 1. (b)
The linearized version is the tangent of f at µt. The projection of the mean µt is correct.
However, the projected covariance ˜Σt+1 differs from Σt+1.
robot
landmark
Figure 26.9 Localization using the extended Kalman ﬁlter. The robot moves on a straight
line. As it progresses, its uncertainty in its location estimate increases, as illustrated by the
error ellipses. When it observes a landmark with known position, the uncertainty is reduced.
The trend in robotics is clearly towards representations with well-deﬁned semantics.
Probabilistic techniques outperform other approaches in many hard perceptual problems such
as localization and mapping. However, statistical techniques are sometimes too cumbersome,
and simpler solutions may be just as effective in practice. To help decide which approach to
take, experience working with real physical robots is your best teacher.
26.4.3 Supervised and unsupervised learning in robot perception
Machine learning plays an important role in robot perception. This is particularly the case
when the best internal representation is not known. One common approach is to map high-
dimensional sensor streams into lower-dimensional spaces using unsupervised machine learn-
ing methods (see Chapter 19). Such an approach is called low-dimensional embedding.
Low-dimensional
embedding
Machine learning makes it possible to learn sensor and motion models from data, while si-
multaneously discovering a suitable internal representation.
Another machine learning technique enables robots to continuously adapt to big changes
in sensor measurements. Picture yourself walking from a sunlit space into a dark room with
neon lights. Clearly, things are darker inside. But the change of light source also affects all


Section 26.5
Planning and Control
945
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 26.10 Sequence of “drivable surface” classiﬁcations using adaptive vision. (a) Only
the road is classiﬁed as drivable (pink area). The V-shaped blue line shows where the vehicle
is heading. (b) The vehicle is commanded to drive off the road, and the classiﬁer is beginning
to classify some of the grass as drivable. (c) The vehicle has updated its model of drivable
surfaces to correspond to grass as well as road. Courtesy of Sebastian Thrun.
the colors: neon light has a stronger component of green light than sunlight has. Yet somehow
we seem not to notice the change. If we walk together with people into a neon-lit room, we
don’t think that their faces suddenly turned green. Our perception quickly adapts to the new
lighting conditions, and our brain ignores the differences.
Adaptive perception techniques enable robots to adjust to such changes. One example
is shown in Figure 26.10, taken from the autonomous driving domain. Here an unmanned
ground vehicle adapts its classiﬁer of the concept “drivable surface.” How does this work?
The robot uses a laser to provide classiﬁcation for a small area immediately in front of the
robot. When this area is found to be ﬂat in the laser range scan, it is used as a positive training
example for the concept “drivable surface.” A mixture-of-Gaussians technique similar to the
EM algorithm discussed in Chapter 21 is then trained to recognize the speciﬁc color and
texture coefﬁcients of the small sample patch. The images in Figure 26.10 are the result of
applying this classiﬁer to the full image.
Methods that make robots collect their own training data (with labels!) are called self-
supervised. In this instance, the robot uses machine learning to leverage a short-range sensor
Self-supervised
learning
that works well for terrain classiﬁcation into a sensor that can see much farther. That allows
the robot to drive faster, slowing down only when the sensor model says there is a change in
the terrain that needs to be examined more carefully by the short-range sensors.
26.5 Planning and Control
The robot’s deliberations ultimately come down to deciding how to move, from the abstract
task level all the way down to the currents that are sent to its motors. In this section, we
simplify by assuming that perception (and, where needed, prediction) are given, so the world
is observable. We further assume deterministic transitions (dynamics) of the world.
We start by separating motion from control. We deﬁne a path as a sequence of points in
Path
geometric space that a robot (or a robot part, such as an arm) will follow. This is related to
the notion of path in Chapter 3, but here we mean a sequence of points in space rather than a
sequence of discrete actions. The task of ﬁnding a good path is called motion planning.


946
Chapter 26
Robotics
y
x
R
O
y
x
Cobs
O
Figure 26.11 A simple triangular robot that can translate, and needs to avoid a rectangular
obstacle. On the left is the workspace, on the right is the conﬁguration space.
Once we have a path, the task of executing a sequence of actions to follow the path is
called trajectory tracking control. A trajectory is a path that has a time associated with
Trajectory tracking
control
Trajectory
each point on the path. A path just says “go from A to B to C, etc.” and a trajectory says
“start at A, take 1 second to get to B, and another 1.5 seconds to get to C, etc.”
26.5.1 Conﬁguration space
Imagine a simple robot, R, in the shape of a right triangle as shown by the lavender triangle in
the lower left corner of Figure 26.11. The robot needs to plan a path that avoids a rectangular
obstacle, O. The physical space that a robot moves about in is called the workspace. This
Workspace
particular robot can move in any direction in the x −y plane, but cannot rotate. The ﬁgure
shows ﬁve other possible positions of the robot with dashed outlines; these are each as close
to the obstacle as the robot can get.
The body of the robot could be represented as a set of (x,y) points (or (x,y,z) points
for a three-dimensional robot), as could the obstacle. With this representation, avoiding the
obstacle means that no point on the robot overlaps any point on the obstacle. Motion planning
would require calculations on sets of points, which can be complicated and time-consuming.
We can simplify the calculations by using a representation scheme in which all the points
that comprise the robot are represented as a single point in an abstract multidimensional
space, which we call the conﬁguration space, or C-space. The idea is that the set of points
Conﬁguration space
C-space
that comprise the robot can be computed if we know (1) the basic measurements of the robot
(for our triangle robot, the length of the three sides will do) and (2) the current pose of the
robot—its position and orientation.
For our simple triangular robot, two dimensions sufﬁce for the C-space: if we know the
(x,y) coordinates of a speciﬁc point on the robot—we’ll use the right-angle vertex—then we
can calculate where every other point of the triangle is (because we know the size and shape of
the triangle and because the triangle cannot rotate). In the lower-left corner of Figure 26.11,
the lavender triangle can be represented by the conﬁguration (0,0).
If we change the rules so that the robot can rotate, then we will need three dimensions,
(x,y,θ), to be able to calculate where every point is. Here θ is the robot’s angle of rotation
in the plane. If the robot also had the ability to stretch itself, growing uniformly by a scaling
factor s, then the C-space would have four dimensions, (x,y,θ,s).


Section 26.5
Planning and Control
947
For now we’ll stick with the simple two-dimensional C-space of the non-rotating triangle
robot. The next task is to ﬁgure out where the points in the obstacle are in C-space. Consider
the ﬁve dashed-line triangles on the left of Figure 26.11 and notice where the right-angle
vertex is on each of these. Then imagine all the ways that the triangle could slide about.
Obviously, the right-angle vertex can’t go inside the obstacle, and neither can it get any
closer than it is on any of the ﬁve dashed-line triangles. So you can see that the area where
the right-angle vertex can’t go—the C-space obstacle—is the ﬁve-sided polygon on the right
C-space obstacle
of Figure 26.11 labeled Cobs
In everyday language we speak of there being multiple obstacles for the robot—a table, a
chair, some walls. But the math notation is a bit easier if we think of all of these as combining
into one “obstacle” that happens to have disconnected components. In general, the C-space
obstacle is the set of all points q in C such that, if the robot were placed in that conﬁguration,
its workspace geometry would intersect the workspace obstacle.
Let the obstacles in the workspace be the set of points O, and let the set of all points on
the robot in conﬁguration q be A(q). Then the C-space obstacle is deﬁned as
Cobs = {q : q ∈C andA(q)∩O̸ = {}}
and the free space is Cfree = C −Cobs.
Free space
The C-space becomes more interesting for robots with moving parts. Consider the two-
link arm from Figure 26.12(a). It is bolted to a table so the base does not move, but the arm
has two joints that move independently—we call these degrees of freedom (DOF). Moving
Degrees of freedom
(DOF)
the joints alters the (x,y) coordinates of the elbow, the gripper, and every point on the arm.
The arm’s conﬁguration space is two-dimensional: (θshou,θelb), where θshou is the angle of
the shoulder joint, and θelb is the angle of the elbow joint.
Knowing the conﬁguration for our two-link arm means we can determine where each
point on the arm is through simple trigonometry. In general, the forward kinematics map-
Forward kinematics
ping is a function
φb : C →W
that takes in a conﬁguration and outputs the location of a particular point b on the robot when
the robot is in that conﬁguration. A particularly useful forward kinematics mapping is that for
the robot’s end effector, φEE. The set of all points on the robot in a particular conﬁguration q
is denoted by A(q) ⊂W:
A(q) =
[
b
{φb(q)}.
The inverse problem, of mapping a desired location for a point on the robot to the conﬁg-
uration(s) the robot needs to be in for that to happen, is known as inverse kinematics:
Inverse kinematics
IKb : x ∈W 7→{q ∈C s.t. φb(q) = x}.
Sometimes the inverse kinematics mapping might take not just a position, but also a desired
orientation as input. When we want a manipulator to grasp an object, for instance, we can
compute a desired position and orientation for its gripper, and use inverse kinematics to de-
termine a goal conﬁguration for the robot. Then a planner needs to ﬁnd a way to get the robot
from its current conﬁguration to the goal conﬁguration without intersecting obstacles.
Workspace obstacles are often depicted as simple geometric forms—especially in robotics
textbooks, which tend to focus on polygonal obstacles. But how do the obstacles look in con-
ﬁguration space?


948
Chapter 26
Robotics
shou
elb
s
e
e
table
table
left wall
vertical
obstacle
s
w
w
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.12 (a) Workspace representation of a robot arm with two degrees of freedom. The
workspace is a box with a ﬂat obstacle hanging from the ceiling. (b) Conﬁguration space of
the same robot. Only white regions in the space are conﬁgurations that are free of collisions.
The dot in this diagram corresponds to the conﬁguration of the robot shown on the left.
For the two-link arm, simple obstacles in the workspace, like a vertical line, have very
complex C-space counterparts, as shown in Figure 26.12(b). The different shadings of the
occupied space correspond to the different objects in the robot’s workspace: the dark region
surrounding the entire free space corresponds to conﬁgurations in which the robot collides
with itself. It is easy to see that extreme values of the shoulder or elbow angles cause such a
violation. The two oval-shaped regions on both sides of the robot correspond to the table on
which the robot is mounted. The third oval region corresponds to the left wall.
Finally, the most interesting object in conﬁguration space is the vertical obstacle that
hangs from the ceiling and impedes the robot’s motions. This object has a funny shape in
conﬁguration space: it is highly nonlinear and at places even concave. With a little bit of
imagination the reader will recognize the shape of the gripper at the upper left end.
We encourage the reader to pause for a moment and study this diagram. The shape of this
obstacle in C-space is not at all obvious! The dot inside Figure 26.12(b) marks the conﬁgu-
ration of the robot in Figure 26.12(a). Figure 26.13 depicts three additional conﬁgurations,
both in workspace and in conﬁguration space. In conﬁguration conf-1, the gripper is grasping
the vertical obstacle.
We see that even if the robot’s workspace is represented by ﬂat polygons, the shape of
the free space can be very complicated. In practice, therefore, one usually probes a conﬁgu-
ration space instead of constructing it explicitly. A planner may generate a conﬁguration and
then test to see if it is in free space by applying the robot kinematics and then checking for
collisions in workspace coordinates.


Section 26.5
Planning and Control
949
conf-3
conf-1
conf-2
conf-3
conf-2
conf-1
e
s
w
w
table
table
vertical
obstacle
left wall
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.13 Three robot conﬁgurations, shown in workspace and conﬁguration space.
26.5.2 Motion planning
The motion planning problem is that of ﬁnding a plan that takes a robot from one conﬁgura-
Motion planning
tion to another without colliding with an obstacle. It is a basic building block for movement
and manipulation. In Section 26.5.4 we will discuss how to do this under complicated dy-
namics, like steering a car that may drift off the path if you take a curve too fast. For now, we
will focus on the simple motion planning problem of ﬁnding a geometric path that is collision
free. Motion planning is a quintessentially continuous-state search problem, but it is often
possible to discretize the space and apply the search algorithms from Chapter 3.
The motion planning problem is sometimes referred to as the piano mover’s problem. It
Piano mover’s
problem
gets its name from a mover’s struggles with getting a large, irregular-shaped piano from one
room to another without hitting anything. We are given:
• a workspace world W in either R2 for the plane or R3 for three dimensions,
• an obstacle region O ⊂W,
• a robot with a conﬁguration space C and set of points A(q) for q ∈C,
• a starting conﬁguration qs ∈C, and
• a goal conﬁguration qg ∈C.
The obstacle region induces a C-space obstacle Cobs and its corresponding free space Cfree
deﬁned as in the previous section. We need to ﬁnd a continuous path through free space. We
will use a parameterized curve, τ(t), to represent the path, where τ(0) = qs and τ(1) = qg
and τ(t) for every t between 0 and 1 is some point in Cfree. That is, t parameterizes how
far we are along the path, from start to goal. Note that t acts somewhat like time in that as
t increases the distance along the path increases, but t is always a point on the interval [0,1]
and is not measured in seconds.


