956
Chapter 26
Robotics
function1 over paths. That is, we want to minimize the cost function J(τ), where τ(0) = qs
and τ(1) = qg.
J is called a functional because it is a function over functions. The argument to J is
τ, which is itself a function: τ(t) takes as input a point in the [0,1] interval and maps it to
a conﬁguration. A standard cost functional trades off between two important aspects of the
robot’s motion: collision avoidance and efﬁciency,
J = Jobs +λJeff
where the efﬁciency Jeff measures the length of the path and may also measure smoothness. A
convenient way to deﬁne efﬁciency is with a quadratic: it integrates the squared ﬁrst derivative
of τ (we will see in a bit why this does in fact incentivize short paths):
Jeff =
Z 1
0
1
2∥˙τ(s)∥2ds.
For the obstacle term, assume we can compute the distance d(x) from any point x ∈W to
the nearest obstacle edge. This distance is positive outside of obstacles, 0 at the edge, and
negative inside. This is called a signed distance ﬁeld. We can now deﬁne a cost ﬁeld in the
Signed distance ﬁeld
workspace, call it c, that has high cost inside of obstacles, and a small cost right outside. With
this cost, we can make points in the workspace really hate being inside obstacles, and dislike
being right next to them (avoiding the visibility graph problem of their always hanging out
by the edges of obstacles). Of course, our robot is not a point in the workspace, so we have
some more work to do—we need to consider all points b on the robot’s body:
Jobs =
Z 1
0
Z
b c(φb(τ(s))
|
{z
}
∈W
)∥d
ds φb(τ(s))
|
{z
}
∈W
∥db ds.
This is called a path integral—it does not just integrate c along the way for each body point,
Path integral
but it multiplies by the derivative to make the cost invariant to retiming of the path. Imagine a
robot sweeping through the cost ﬁeld, accumulating cost as is moves. Regardless of how fast
or slow the arm moves through the ﬁeld, it must accumulate the exact same cost.
The simplest way to solve the optimization problem above and ﬁnd a path is gradient
descent. If you are wondering how to take gradients of functionals with respect to functions,
something called the calculus of variations is here to help. It is especially easy for functionals
of the form
J[τ] =
Z 1
0 F(s,τ(s), ˙τ(s))ds
which are integrals of functions that depend just on the parameter s, the value of the function
at s, and the derivative of the function at s. In such a case, the Euler-Lagrange equation
Euler-Lagrange
equation
says that the gradient is
∇τJ(s) =
∂F
∂τ(s)(s)−d
dt
∂F
∂˙τ(s)(s).
If we look closely at Jeff and Jobs, they both follow this pattern. In particular for Jeff , we have
F(s,τ(s), ˙τ(s)) = ∥˙τ(s)∥2. To get a bit more comfortable with this, let’s compute the gradient
1
Roboticists like to minimize a cost function J, whereas in other parts of AI we try to maximize a utility function
U or a reward R.


Section 26.5
Planning and Control
957
Figure 26.20 Trajectory optimization for motion planning. Two point-obstacles with circu-
lar bands of decreasing cost around them. The optimizer starts with the straight line trajectory,
and lets the obstacles bend the line away from collisions, ﬁnding the minimum path through
the cost ﬁeld.
for Jeff only. We see that F does not have a direct dependence on τ(s), so the ﬁrst term in the
formula is 0. We are left with
∇τJ(s) = 0−d
dt ˙τ(s)
since the partial of F with respect to ˙τ(s) is ˙τ(s).
Notice how we made things easier for ourselves when deﬁning Jeff —it’s a nice quadratic
of the derivative (and we even put a 1
2 in front so that the 2 nicely cancels out). In practice,
you will see this trick happen a lot for optimization—the art is not just in choosing how to
optimize the cost function, but also in choosing a cost function that will play nicely with how
you will optimize it. Simplifying our gradient, we get
∇τJ(s) = −¨τ(s).
Now, since Jeff is a quadratic, setting this gradient to 0 gives us the solution for τ if we
didn’t have to deal with obstacles. Integrating once, we get that the ﬁrst derivative needs
to be constant; integrating again we get that τ(s) = a · s + b, with a and b determined by
the endpoint constraints for τ(0) and τ(1). The optimal path with respect to Jeff is thus the
straight line from start to goal! It is indeed the most efﬁcient way to go from one to the other
if there are no obstacles to worry about.
Of course, the addition of Jobs is what makes things difﬁcult—and we will spare you
deriving its gradient here. The robot would typically initialize its path to be a straight line,
which would plow right through some obstacles. It would then calculate the gradient of the
cost about the current path, and the gradient would serve to push the path away from the
obstacles (Figure 26.20). Keep in mind that gradient descent will only ﬁnd a locally optimal
solution—just like hill climbing. Methods such as simulated annealing (Section 4.1.2) can be
used for exploration, to make it more likely that the local optimum is a good one.
26.5.3 Trajectory tracking control
We have covered how to plan motions, but not how to actually move—to apply current to
motors, to produce torque, to move the robot. This is the realm of control theory, a ﬁeld
Control theory
of increasing importance in AI. There are two main questions to deal with: how do we turn


958
Chapter 26
Robotics
Figure 26.21 The task of reaching to grasp a bottle solved with a trajectory optimizer. Left:
the initial trajectory, plotted for the end effector. Middle: the ﬁnal trajectory after optimiza-
tion. Right: the goal conﬁguration. Courtesy of Anca Dragan. See Ratliff et al. (2009).
a mathematical description of a path into a sequence of actions in the real world (open-loop
control), and how do we make sure that we are staying on track (closed-loop control)?
From conﬁgurations to torques for open-loop tracking: Our path τ(t) gives us conﬁg-
urations. The robot starts at rest at qs = τ(0). From there the robot’s motors will turn currents
into torques, leading to motion. But what torques should the robot aim for, such that it ends
up at qg = τ(1)?
This is where the idea of a dynamics model (or transition model) comes in. We can give
Dynamics model
the robot a function f that computes the effects torques have on the conﬁguration. Remem-
ber F = ma from physics? Well, there is something like that for torques too, in the form
u = f −1(q, ˙q, ¨q), with u a torque, ˙q a velocity, and ¨q an acceleration.2 If the robot is at conﬁg-
uration q and velocity ˙q, and applied torque u, that would lead to acceleration ¨q = f(q, ˙q,u).
The tuple (q, ˙q) is a dynamic state, because it includes velocity, whereas q is the kinematic
Dynamic state
state and is not sufﬁcient for computing exactly what torque to apply. f is a deterministic
Kinematic state
dynamics model in the MDP over dynamic states with torques as actions. f −1 is the inverse
dynamics, telling us what torque to apply if we want a particular acceleration, which leads
Inverse dynamics
to a change in velocity and thus a change in dynamic state.
Now, naively, we could think of t ∈[0,1] as “time” on a scale from 0 to 1 and select our
torque using inverse dynamics:
u(t) = f −1(τ(t), ˙τ(t), ¨τ(t))
(26.2)
assuming that the robot starts at (τ(0), ˙τ(0)). In reality though, things are not that easy.
The path τ was created as a sequence of points, without taking velocities and accelera-
tions into account. As such, the path may not satisfy ˙τ(0) = 0 (the robot starts at 0 velocity),
or even that τ is differentiable (let alone twice differentiable). Further, the meaning of the
endpoint “1” is unclear: how many seconds does that map to?
In practice, before we even think of tracking a reference path, we usually retime it, that
Retiming
is, transform it into a trajectory ξ(t) that maps the interval [0,T] for some time duration T
into points in the conﬁguration space C. (The symbol ξ is the Greek letter Xi.) Retiming is
trickier than you might think, but there are approximate ways to do it, for instance by picking
a maximum velocity and acceleration, and using a proﬁle that accelerates to that maximum
2
We omit the details of f −1 here, but they involve mass, inertia, gravity, and Coriolis and centrifugal forces.


Section 26.5
Planning and Control
959
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 26.22 Robot arm control using (a) proportional control with gain factor 1.0, (b) pro-
portional control with gain factor 0.1, and (c) PD (proportional derivative) control with gain
factors 0.3 for the proportional component and 0.8 for the differential component. In all cases
the robot arm tries to follow the smooth line path, but in (a) and (b) deviates substantially from
the path.
velocity, stays there as long as it can, and then decelerates back to 0. Assuming we can do
this, Equation (26.2) above can be rewritten as
u(t) = f −1(ξ(t), ˙ξ(t), ¨ξ(t)).
(26.3)
Even with the change from τ to ξ, an actual trajectory, the equation of applying torques from
above (called a control law) has a problem in practice. Thinking back to the reinforcement
Control law
learning section, you might guess what it is. The equation works great in the situation where
f is exact, but pesky reality gets in the way as usual: in real systems, we can’t measure masses
and inertias exactly, and f might not properly account for physical phenomena like stiction in
Stiction
the motors (the friction that tends to prevent stationary surfaces from being set in motion—to
make them stick). So, when the robot arm starts applying those torques but f is wrong, the
errors accumulate and you deviate further and further from the reference path.
Rather than just letting those errors accumulate, a robot can use a control process that
looks at where it thinks it is, compares that to where it wanted to be, and applies a torque to
minimize the error.
A controller that provides force in negative proportion to the observed error is known as
a proportional controller or P controller for short. The equation for the force is:
P controller
u(t) = KP(ξ(t)−qt)
where qt is the current conﬁguration, and KP is a constant representing the gain factor of the
Gain factor
controller. KP regulates how strongly the controller corrects for deviations between the actual
state qt and the desired state ξ(t).
Figure 26.22(a) illustrates what can go wrong with proportional control. Whenever a de-
viation occurs—whether due to noise or to constraints on the forces the robot can apply—the
robot provides an opposing force whose magnitude is proportional to this deviation. Intu-
itively, this might appear plausible, since deviations should be compensated by a counterforce
to keep the robot on track. However, as Figure 26.22(a) illustrates, a proportional controller
can cause the robot to apply too much force, overshooting the desired path and zig-zagging


960
Chapter 26
Robotics
back and forth. This is the result of the natural inertia of the robot: once driven back to its
reference position the robot has a velocity that can’t instantaneously be stopped.
In Figure 26.22(a), the parameter KP = 1. At ﬁrst glance, one might think that choosing
a smaller value for KP would remedy the problem, giving the robot a gentler approach to
the desired path. Unfortunately, this is not the case. Figure 26.22(b) shows a trajectory for
KP = .1, still exhibiting oscillatory behavior. The lower value of the gain parameter helps, but
does not solve the problem. In fact, in the absence of friction, the P controller is essentially a
spring law; so it will oscillate indeﬁnitely around a ﬁxed target location.
There are a number of controllers that are superior to the simple proportional control law.
A controller is said to be stable if small perturbations lead to a bounded error between the
Stable
robot and the reference signal. It is said to be strictly stable if it is able to return to and then
Strictly stable
stay on its reference path upon such perturbations. Our P controller appears to be stable but
not strictly stable, since it fails to stay anywhere near its reference trajectory.
The simplest controller that achieves strict stability in our domain is a PD controller.
PD controller
The letter ‘P’ stands again for proportional, and ‘D’ stands for derivative. PD controllers are
described by the following equation:
u(t) = KP(ξ(t)−qt)+KD( ˙ξ(t)−˙qt).
(26.4)
As this equation suggests, PD controllers extend P controllers by a differential component,
which adds to the value of u(t) a term that is proportional to the ﬁrst derivative of the error
ξ(t) −qt over time. What is the effect of such a term? In general, a derivative term damp-
ens the system that is being controlled. To see this, consider a situation where the error is
changing rapidly over time, as is the case for our P controller above. The derivative of this
error will then counteract the proportional term, which will reduce the overall response to
the perturbation. However, if the same error persists and does not change, the derivative will
vanish and the proportional term dominates the choice of control.
Figure 26.22(c) shows the result of applying this PD controller to our robot arm, using as
gain parameters KP = .3 and KD = .8. Clearly, the resulting path is much smoother, and does
not exhibit any obvious oscillations.
PD controllers do have failure modes, however. In particular, PD controllers may fail to
regulate an error down to zero, even in the absence of external perturbations. Often such a
situation is the result of a systematic external force that is not part of the model. For example,
an autonomous car driving on a banked surface may ﬁnd itself systematically pulled to one
side. Wear and tear in robot arms causes similar systematic errors. In such situations, an
over-proportional feedback is required to drive the error closer to zero. The solution to this
problem lies in adding a third term to the control law, based on the integrated error over time:
u(t) = KP(ξ(t)−qt)+KI
Z t
0 (ξ(s)−qs)ds+KD( ˙ξ(t)−˙qt).
(26.5)
Here KI is a third gain parameter. The term
R t
0(ξ(s) calculates the integral of the error over
time. The effect of this term is that long-lasting deviations between the reference signal and
the actual state are corrected. Integral terms, then, ensure that a controller does not exhibit
systematic long-term error, although they do pose a danger of oscillatory behavior.
A controller with all three terms is called a PID controller (for proportional integral
PID controller
derivative). PID controllers are widely used in industry, for a variety of control problems.
Think of the three terms as follows—proportional: try harder the farther away you are from


Section 26.5
Planning and Control
961
the path; derivative: try even harder if the error is increasing; integral: try harder if you
haven’t made progress for a long time.
A middle ground between open-loop control based on inverse dynamics and closed-loop
PID control is called computed torque control. We compute the torque our model thinks we
Computed torque
control
will need, but compensate for model inaccuracy with proportional error terms:
u(t) = f −1(ξ(t), ˙ξ(t), ¨ξ(t))
|
{z
}
feedforward
+m(ξ(t))
 KP(ξ(t)−qt)+KD( ˙ξ(t)−˙qt)

|
{z
}
feedback
.
(26.6)
The ﬁrst term is called the feedforward component because it looks forward to where the
Feedforward
component
robot needs to go and computes what torque might be required. The second is the feedback
component because it feeds the current error in the dynamic state back into the control law.
Feedback
component
m(q) is the inertia matrix at conﬁguration q—unlike normal PD control, the gains change
with the conﬁguration of the system.
Plans versus policies
Let’s take a step back and make sure we understand the analogy between what happened so far
in this chapter and what we learned in the search, MDP, and reinforcement learning chapters.
With motion in robotics, we are really considering an underlying MDP where the states are
dynamic states (conﬁguration and velocity), and the actions are control inputs, usually in
the form of torques. If you take another look at our control laws above, they are policies,
not plans—they tell the robot what action to take from any state it might reach. However,
they are usually far from optimal policies. Because the dynamic state is continuous and high
dimensional (as is the action space), optimal policies are computationally difﬁcult to extract.
Instead, what we did here is to break up the problem. We come up with a plan ﬁrst, in
a simpliﬁed state and action space: we use only the kinematic state, and assume that states
are reachable from one another without paying attention to the underlying dynamics. This is
motion planning, and it gives us the reference path. If we knew the dynamics perfectly, we
could turn this into a plan for the original state and action space with Equation (26.3).
But because our dynamics model is typically erroneous, we turn it instead into a policy
that tries to follow the plan—getting back to it when it drifts away. When doing this, we
introduce suboptimality in two ways: ﬁrst by planning without considering dynamics, and
second by assuming that if we deviate from the plan, the optimal thing to do is to return to
the original plan. In what follows, we describe techniques that compute policies directly over
the dynamic state, avoiding the separation altogether.
26.5.4 Optimal control
Rather than using a planner to create a kinematic path, and only worrying about the dynamics
of the system after the fact, here we discuss how we might be able to do it all at once. We’ll
take the trajectory optimization problem for kinematic paths, and turn it into true trajectory
optimization with dynamics: we will optimize directly over the actions, taking the dynamics
(or transitions) into account.
This brings us much closer to what we’ve seen in the search and MDP chapters. If we
know the system’s dynamics, then we can ﬁnd a sequence of actions to execute, as we did in
Chapter 3. If we’re not sure, then we might want a policy, as in Chapter 16.


