968
Chapter 26
Robotics
26.8 Humans and Robots
Thus far, we’ve focused on a robot planning and learning how to act in isolation. This is
useful for some robots, like the rovers we send out to explore distant planets on our behalf.
But, for the most part, we do not build robots to work in isolation. We build them to help us,
and to work in human environments, around and with us.
This raises two complementary challenges. First is optimizing reward when there are
people acting in the same environment as the robot. We call this the coordination problem
(see Section 17.1). When the robot’s reward depends on not just its own actions, but also the
actions that people take, the robot has to choose its actions in a way that meshes well with
theirs. When the human and the robot are on the same team, this turns into collaboration.
Second is the challenge of optimizing for what people actually want. If a robot is to
help people, its reward function needs to incentivize the actions that people want the robot to
execute. Figuring out the right reward function (or policy) for the robot is itself an interaction
problem. We will explore these two challenges in turn.
26.8.1 Coordination
Let’s assume for now, as we have been, that the robot has access to a clearly deﬁned reward
function. But, instead of needing to optimize it in isolation, now the robot needs to optimize
it around a human who is also acting. For example, as an autonomous car merges on the
highway, it needs to negotiate the maneuver with the human driver coming in the target lane—
should it accelerate and merge in front, or slow down and merge behind? Later, as it pulls to
a stop sign, preparing to take a right, it has to watch out for the cyclist in the bicycle lane, and
for the pedestrian about to step onto the crosswalk.
Or, consider a mobile robot in a hallway. Someone heading straight toward the robot
steps slightly to the right, indicating which side of the robot they want to pass on. The robot
has to respond, clarifying its intentions.
Humans as approximately rational agents
One way to formulate coordination with a human is to model it as a game between the robot
and the human (Section 17.2). With this approach, we explicitly make the assumption that
people are agents incentivized by objectives. This does not automatically mean that they are
perfectly rational agents (i.e., ﬁnd optimal solutions in the game), but it does mean that the
robot can structure the way it reasons about the human via the notion of possible objectives
that the human might have. In this game:
• the state of the environment captures the conﬁgurations of both the robot and human
agents; call it x = (xR,xH);
• each agent can take actions, uR and uH respectively;
• each agent has an objective that can be represented as a cost, JR and JH: each agent
wants to get to its goal safely and efﬁciently;
• and, as in any game, each objective depends on the state and on the actions of both
agents: JR(x,uR,uH) and JH(x,uH,uR). Think of the car-pedestrian interaction—the car
should stop if the pedestrian crosses, and should go forward if the pedestrian waits.
Three important aspects complicate this game. First is that the human and the robot don’t
necessarily know each other’s objectives. This makes it an incomplete information game.
Incomplete
information game


Section 26.8
Humans and Robots
969
Second is that the state and action spaces are continuous, as they’ve been throughout this
chapter. We learned in Chapter 6 how to do tree search to tackle discrete games, but how do
we tackle continuous spaces?
Third, even though at the high level the game model makes sense—humans do move,
and they do have objectives—a human’s behavior might not always be well-characterized as
a solution to the game. The game comes with a computational challenge not only for the
robot, but for us humans too. It requires thinking about what the robot will do in response to
what the person does, which depends on what the robot thinks the person will do, and pretty
soon we get to “what do you think I think you think I think”— it’s turtles all the way down!
Humans can’t deal with all of that, and exhibit certain suboptimalities. This means that the
robot should account for these suboptimalities.
So, then, what is an autonomous car to do when the coordination problem is this hard?
We will do something similar to what we’ve done before in this chapter. For motion planning
and control, we took an MDP and broke it up into planning a trajectory and then tracking it
with a controller. Here too, we will take the game, and break it up into making predictions
about human actions, and deciding what the robot should do given these predictions.
Predicting human action
Predicting human actions is hard because they depend on the robot’s actions and vice versa.
One trick that robots use is to pretend the person is ignoring the robot. The robot assumes
people are noisily optimal with respect to their objective, which is unknown to the robot and
is modeled as no longer dependent on the robot’s actions: JH(x,uH). In particular, the higher
the value of an action for the objective (the lower the cost to go), the more likely the human
is to take it. The robot can create a model for P(uH | x,JH), for instance using the softmax
function from page 862:
P(uH | x,JH) ∝e−Q(x,uH;JH)
(26.8)
with Q(x,uH;JH) the Q-value function corresponding to JH (the negative sign is there because
in robotics we like to minimize cost, not maximize reward). Note that the robot does not
assume perfectly optimal actions, nor does it assume that the actions are chosen based on
reasoning about the robot at all.
Armed with this model, the robot uses the human’s ongoing actions as evidence about JH.
If we have an observation model for how human actions depend on the human’s objective,
each human action can be incorporated to update the robot’s belief over what objective the
person has:
b′(JH) ∝b(JH)P(uH | x,JH).
(26.9)
An example is in Figure 26.27: the robot is tracking a human’s location and as the hu-
man moves, the robot updates its belief over human goals. As the human heads toward the
windows, the robot increases the probability that the goal is to look out the window, and
decreases the probability that the goal is going to the kitchen, which is in the other direction.
This is how the human’s past actions end up informing the robot about what the human
will do in the future. Having a belief about the human’s goal helps the robot anticipate
what next actions the human will take. The heatmap in the ﬁgure shows the robot’s future
predictions: red is most probable; blue least probable.


970
Chapter 26
Robotics
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 26.27 Making predictions by assuming that people are noisily rational given their
goal: the robot uses the past actions to update a belief over what goal the person is heading
to, and then uses the belief to make predictions about future actions. (a) The map of a room.
(b) Predictions after seeing a small part of the person’s trajectory (white path); (c) Predictions
after seeing more human actions: the robot now knows that the person is not heading to the
hallway on the left, because the path taken so far would be a poor path if that were the
person’s goal. Images courtesy of Brian D. Ziebart. See Ziebart et al. (2009).
The same can happen in driving. We might not know how much another driver values
efﬁciency, but if we see them accelerate as someone is trying to merge in front of them, we
now know a bit more about them. And once we know that, we can better anticipate what they
will do in the future—the same driver is likely to come closer behind us, or weave through
trafﬁc to get ahead.
Once the robot can make predictions about human future actions, it has reduced its prob-
lem to solving an MDP. The human actions complicate the transition function, but as long as
the robot can anticipate what action the person will take from any future state, the robot can
calculate P(x′ | x,uR): it can compute P(uH | x) from P(uH | x,JH) by marginalizing over JH,
and combine it with P(x′ | x,uR,uH), the transition (dynamics) function for how the world
updates based on both the robot’s and the human’s actions. In Section 26.5 we focused on
how to solve this in continuous state and action spaces for deterministic dynamics, and in
Section 26.6 we discussed doing it with stochastic dynamics and uncertainty.
Splitting prediction from action makes it easier for the robot to handle interaction, but
sacriﬁces performance much as splitting estimation from motion did, or splitting planning
from control.
A robot with this split no longer understands that its actions can inﬂuence what people
end up doing. In contrast, the robot in Figure 26.27 anticipates where people will go and then
optimizes for reaching its own goal and avoiding collisions with them. In Figure 26.28, we
have an autonomous car merging on the highway. If it just planned in reaction to other cars,
it might have to wait a long time while other cars occupy its target lane. In contrast, a car
that reasons about prediction and action jointly knows that different actions it could take will
result in different reactions from the human. If it starts to assert itself, the other cars are likely
to slow down a bit and make room. Roboticists are working towards coordinated interactions
like this so robots can work better with humans.


Section 26.8
Humans and Robots
971
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.28 (a) Left: An autonomous car (middle lane) predicts that the human driver (left
lane) wants to keep going forward, and plans a trajectory that slows down and merges behind.
Right: The car accounts for the inﬂuence its actions can have on human actions, and realizes
it can merge in front and rely on the human driver to slow down. (b) That same algorithm
produces an unusual strategy at an intersection: the car realizes that it can make it more
likely for the person (bottom) to proceed faster through the intersection by starting to inch
backwards. Images courtesy of Anca Dragan. See Sadigh et al. (2016).
Human predictions about the robot
Incomplete information is often two-sided: the robot does not know the human’s objective
and the human, in turn, does not know the robot’s objective—people need to be making
predictions about robots. As robot designers, we are not in charge of how the human makes
predictions; we can only control what the robot does. However, the robot can act in a way
to make it easier for the human to make correct predictions. The robot can assume that
the human is using something roughly analogous to Equation (26.8) to estimate the robot’s
objective JR, and thus the robot will act so that its true objective can be easily inferred.
A special case of the game is when the human and the robot are on the same team,
working toward the same goal or objective: JH = JR. Imagine getting a personal home robot
that is helping you make dinner or clean up—these are examples of collaboration.
We can now deﬁne a joint agent whose actions are tuples of human–robot actions,
Joint agent
(uH,uR) and who optimizes for JH(x,uH,uR) = JR(x,uR,uH), and we’re solving a regular
planning problem. We compute the optimal plan or policy for the joint agent, and voila, we
now know what the robot and human should do.
This would work really well if people were perfectly optimal. The robot would do its part
of the joint plan, the human theirs. Unfortunately, in practice, people don’t seem to follow
the perfectly laid out joint-agent plan; they have a mind of their own! We’ve already learned
one way to handle this though, back in Section 26.6. We called it model predictive control
(MPC): the idea was to come up with a plan, execute the ﬁrst action, and then replan. That
way, the robot always adapts its plan to what the human is actually doing.
Let’s work through an example. Suppose you and the robot are in your kitchen, and have
decided to make wafﬂes. You are slightly closer to the fridge, so the optimal joint plan would


972
Chapter 26
Robotics
have you grab the eggs and milk from the fridge, while the robot fetches the ﬂour from the
cabinet. The robot knows this because it can measure quite precisely where everyone is. But
suppose you start heading for the ﬂour cabinet. You are going against the optimal joint plan.
Rather than sticking to it and stubbornly also going for the ﬂour, the MPC robot recalculates
the optimal plan, and now that you are close enough to the ﬂour it is best for the robot to grab
the wafﬂe iron instead.
If we know that people might deviate from optimality, we can account for it ahead of time.
In our example, the robot can try to anticipate that you are going for the ﬂour the moment you
take your ﬁrst step (say, using the prediction technique above). Even if it is still technically
optimal for you to turn around and head for the fridge, the robot should not assume that’s
what is going to happen. Instead, the robot can compute a plan in which you keep doing what
you seem to want.
Humans as black box agents
We don’t have to treat people as objective-driven, intentional agents to get robots to coordi-
nate with us. An alternative model is that the human is merely some agent whose policy πH
“messes” with the environment dynamics. The robot does not know πH, but can model the
problem as needing to act in an MDP with unknown dynamics. We have seen this before: for
general agents in Chapter 23, and for robots in particular in Section 26.7.
The robot can ﬁt a policy model πH to human data, and use it to compute an optimal
policy for itself. Due to scarcity of data, this has been mostly used so far at the task level. For
instance, robots have learned through interaction what actions people tend to take (in response
to its own actions) for the task of placing and drilling screws in an industrial assembly task.
Then there is also the model-free reinforcement learning alternative: the robot can start
with some initial policy or value function, and keep improving it over time via trial and error.
26.8.2 Learning to do what humans want
Another way interaction with humans comes into robotics is in JR itself—the robot’s cost or
reward function. The framework of rational agents and the associated algorithms reduce the
problem of generating good behavior to specifying a good reward function. But for robots,
as for many other AI agents, getting the cost right is still difﬁcult.
Take autonomous cars: we want them to reach the destination, to be safe, to drive com-
fortably for their passengers, to obey trafﬁc laws, etc. A designer of such a system needs to
trade off these different components of the cost function. The designer’s task is hard because
robots are built to help end users, and not every end user is the same. We all have different
preferences for how aggressively we want our car to drive, etc.
Below, we explore two alternatives for trying to get robot behavior to match what we
actually want the robot to do. The ﬁrst is to learn a cost function from human input. The
second is to bypass the cost function and imitate human demonstrations of the task.
Preference learning: Learning cost functions
Imagine that an end user is showing a robot how to do a task. For instance, they are driving
the car in the way they would like it to be driven by the robot. Can you think of a way for the
robot to use these actions—we call them “demonstrations”—to ﬁgure out what cost function
it should optimize?


Section 26.8
Humans and Robots
973
Figure 26.29 Left: A mobile robot is shown a demonstration that stays on the dirt road.
Middle: The robot infers the desired cost function, and uses it in a new scene, knowing to
put lower cost on the road there. Right: The robot plans a path for the new scene that also
stays on the road, reproducing the preferences behind the demonstration. Images courtesy of
Nathan Ratliff and James A. Bagnell. See Ratliff et al. (2006).
We have actually already seen the answer to this back in Section 26.8.1. There, the setup
was a little different: we had another person taking actions in the same space as the robot, and
the robot needed to predict what the person would do. But one technique we went over for
making these predictions was to assume that people act to noisily optimize some cost function
JH, and we can use their ongoing actions as evidence about what cost function that is. We
can do the same here, except not for the purpose of predicting human behavior in the future,
but rather acquiring the cost function the robot itself should optimize. If the person drives
defensively, the cost function that will explain their actions will put a lot of weight on safety
and less so on efﬁciency. The robot can adopt this cost function as its own and optimize it
when driving the car itself.
Roboticists have experimented with different algorithms for making this cost inference
computationally tractable. In Figure 26.29, we see an example of teaching a robot to prefer
staying on the road to going over the grassy terrain. Traditionally in such methods, the cost
function has been represented as a combination of hand-crafted features, but recent work has
also studied how to represent it using a deep neural network, without feature engineering.
There are other ways for a person to provide input. A person could use language rather
than demonstration to instruct the robot. A person could act as a critic, watching the robot
perform a task one way (or two ways) and then saying how well the task was done (or which
way was better), or giving advice on how to improve.
Learning policies directly via imitation
An alternative is to bypass cost functions and learn the desired robot policy directly. In our
car example, the human’s demonstrations make for a convenient data set of states labeled by
the action the robot should take at each state: D = {(xi,ui)}. The robot can run supervised
learning to ﬁt a policy π : x 7→u, and execute that policy. This is called imitation learning or
behavioral cloning.
Behavioral cloning
A challenge with this approach is in generalization to new states. The robot does not
Generalization
know why the actions in its database have been marked as optimal. It has no causal rule; all
it can do is run a supervised learning algorithm to try to learn a policy that will generalize to
unknown states. However, there is no guarantee that the generalization will be correct.


