950
Chapter 26
Robotics
qg
qs
Figure 26.14 A visibility graph. Lines connect every pair of vertices that can “see” each
other—lines that don’t go through an obstacle. The shortest path must lie upon these lines.
The motion planning problem can be made more complex in various ways: deﬁning the
goal as a set of possible conﬁgurations rather than a single conﬁguration; deﬁning the goal
in the workspace rather than the C-space; deﬁning a cost function (e.g., path length) to be
minimized; satisfying constraints (e.g., if the path involves carrying a cup of coffee, making
sure that the cup is always oriented upright so the coffee does not spill).
The spaces of motion planning: Let’s take a step back and make sure we understand the
spaces involved in motion planning. First, there is the workspace or world W. Points in W are
points in the everyday three-dimensional world. Next, we have the space of conﬁgurations,
C. Points q in C are d-dimensional, with d the robot’s number of degrees of freedom, and
map to sets of points A(q) in W. Finally, there is the space of paths. The space of paths is a
space of functions. Each point in this space maps to an entire curve through C-space. This
space is ∞-dimensional! Intuitively, we need d dimensions for each conﬁguration along the
path, and there are as many conﬁgurations on a path as there are points in the number line
interval [0,1]. Now let’s consider some ways of solving the motion planning problem.
Visibility graphs
For the simpliﬁed case of two-dimensional conﬁguration spaces and polygonal C-space ob-
stacles, visibility graphs are a convenient way to solve the motion planning problem with a
Visibility graph
guaranteed shortest-path solution. Let Vobs ⊂C be the set of vertices of the polygons making
up Cobs, and let V = Vobs ∪{qs,qg}.
We construct a graph G = (V,E) on the vertex set V with edges ei j ∈E connecting a
vertex vi to another vertex vj if the line connecting the two vertices is collision-free—that is,
if {λvi +(1−λ)v j : λ ∈[0,1]}∩Cobs = {}. When this happens, we say the two vertices “can
see each other,” which is where “visibility” graphs got their name.
To solve the motion planning problem, all we need to do is run a discrete graph search
(e.g., best-ﬁrst search) on the graph G with starting state qs and goal qg. In Figure 26.14
we see a visibility graph and an optimal three-step solution. An optimal search on visibility
graphs will always give us the optimal path (if one exists), or report failure if no path exists.
Voronoi diagrams
Visibility graphs encourage paths that run immediately adjacent to an obstacle—if you had to
walk around a table to get to the door, the shortest path would be to stick as close to the table
as possible. However, if motion or sensing is nondeterministic, that would put you at risk of
bumping into the table. One way to address this is to pretend that the robot’s body is a bit


Section 26.5
Planning and Control
951
Figure 26.15 A Voronoi diagram showing the set of points (black lines) equidistant to two
or more obstacles in conﬁguration space.
larger than it actually is, providing a buffer zone. Another way is to accept that path length
is not the only metric we want to optimize. Section 26.8.2 shows how to learn a good metric
from human examples of behavior.
A third way is to use a different technique, one that puts paths as far away from obstacles
as possible rather than hugging close to them. A Voronoi diagram is a representation that
Voronoi diagram
allows us to do just that. To get an idea for what a Voronoi diagram does, consider a space
where the obstacles are, say, a dozen small points scattered about a plane. Now surround each
of the obstacle points with a region consisting of all the points in the plane that are closer to
Region
that obstacle point than to any other obstacle point. Thus, the regions partition the plane. The
Voronoi diagram consists of the set of regions, and the Voronoi graph consists of the edges
Voronoi graph
and vertices of the regions.
When obstacles are areas, not points, everything stays pretty much the same. Each region
still contains all the points that are closer to one obstacle than to any other, where distance is
measured to the closest point on an obstacle. The boundaries between regions still correspond
to points that are equidistant between two obstacles, but now the boundary may be a curve
rather than a straight line. Computing these boundaries can be prohibitively expensive in
high-dimensional spaces.
To solve the motion planning problem, we connect the start point qs to the closest point
on the Voronoi graph via a straight line, and the same for the goal point qg. We then use
discrete graph search to ﬁnd the shortest path on the graph. For problems like navigating
through corridors indoors, this gives a nice path that goes down the middle of the corridor.
However, in outdoor settings it can come up with inefﬁcient paths, for example suggesting an
unnecessary 100 meter detour to stick to the middle of a wide-open 200-meter space.


952
Chapter 26
Robotics
start
goal
start
goal
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.16 (a) Value function and path found for a discrete grid cell approximation of the
conﬁguration space. (b) The same path visualized in workspace coordinates. Notice how the
robot bends its elbow to avoid a collision with the vertical obstacle.
Cell decomposition
An alternative approach to motion planning is to discretize the C-space. Cell decomposition
Cell decomposition
methods decompose the free space into a ﬁnite number of contiguous regions, called cells.
These cells are designed so that the path-planning problem within a single cell can be solved
by simple means (e.g., moving along a straight line). The path-planning problem then be-
comes a discrete graph search problem (as with visibility graphs and Voronoi graphs) to ﬁnd
a path through a sequence of cells.
The simplest cell decomposition consists of a regularly spaced grid. Figure 26.16(a)
shows a square grid decomposition of the space and a solution path that is optimal for this
grid size. Grayscale shading indicates the value of each free-space grid cell—the cost of
the shortest path from that cell to the goal. (These values can be computed by a deterministic
form of the VALUE-ITERATION algorithm given in Figure 16.6 on page 563.) Figure 26.16(b)
shows the corresponding workspace trajectory for the arm. Of course, we could also use the
A∗algorithm to ﬁnd a shortest path.
This grid decomposition has the advantage that it is simple to implement, but it suffers
from three limitations. First, it is workable only for low-dimensional conﬁguration spaces,
because the number of grid cells increases exponentially with d, the number of dimensions.
(Sounds familiar? This is the curse of dimensionality.) Second, paths through discretized
state space will not always be smooth. We see in Figure 26.16(a) that the diagonal parts of
the path are jagged and hence very difﬁcult for the robot to follow accurately. The robot can
attempt to smooth out the solution path, but this is far from straightforward.
Third, there is the problem of what to do with cells that are “mixed”—that is, neither
entirely within free space nor entirely within occupied space. A solution path that includes


Section 26.5
Planning and Control
953
such a cell may not be a real solution, because there may be no way to safely cross the
cell. This would make the path planner unsound. On the other hand, if we insist that only
completely free cells may be used, the planner will be incomplete, because it might be the
case that the only paths to the goal go through mixed cells—it might be that a corridor is
actually wide enough for the robot to pass, but the corridor is covered only by mixed cells.
The ﬁrst approach to this problem is further subdivision of the mixed cells—perhaps
using cells of half the original size. This can be continued recursively until a path is found
that lies entirely within free cells. This method works well and is complete if there is a way to
decide if a given cell is a mixed cell, which is easy only if the conﬁguration space boundaries
have relatively simple mathematical descriptions.
It is important to note that cell decomposition does not necessarily require explicitly rep-
resenting the obstacle space Cobs. We can decide to include a cell or not by using a collision
checker. This is a crucial notion to motion planning. A collision checker is a function γ(q)
Collision checker
that maps to 1 if the conﬁguration collides with an obstacle, and 0 otherwise. It is much easier
to check whether a speciﬁc conﬁguration is in collision than to explicitly construct the entire
obstacle space Cobs.
Examining the solution path shown in Figure 26.16(a), we can see an additional difﬁculty
that will have to be resolved. The path contains arbitrarily sharp corners, but a physical robot
has momentum and cannot change direction instantaneously. This problem can be solved by
storing, for each grid cell, the exact continuous state (position and velocity) that was attained
when the cell was reached in the search. Assume further that when propagating information
to nearby grid cells, we use this continuous state as a basis, and apply the continuous robot
motion model for jumping to nearby cells. So we don’t make an instantaneous 90◦turn; we
make a rounded turn governed by the laws of motion. We can now guarantee that the resulting
trajectory is smooth and can indeed be executed by the robot. One algorithm that implements
this is hybrid A∗.
Hybrid A∗
Randomized motion planning
Randomized motion planning does graph search on a random decomposition of the conﬁgu-
ration space, rather than a regular cell decomposition. The key idea is to sample a random set
of points and to create edges between them if there is a very simple way to get from one to
the other (e.g., via a straight line) without colliding; then we can search on this graph.
A probabilistic roadmap (PRM) algorithm is one way to leverage this idea. We assume
Probabilistic
roadmap (PRM)
access to a collision checker γ (deﬁned on page 953), and to a simple planner B(q1,q2) that
Simple planner
returns a path from q1 to q2 (or failure) but does so quickly. This simple planner is not going
to be complete—it might return failure even if a solution actually exists. Its job is to quickly
try to connect q1 and q2 and let the main algorithm know if it succeeds. We will use it to
deﬁne whether an edge exists between two vertices.
The algorithm starts by sampling M milestones—points in Cfree—in addition to the
Milestone
points qs and qg. It uses rejection sampling, where conﬁgurations are sampled randomly
and collision-checked using γ until a total of M milestones are found. Next, the algorithm
uses the simple planner to try to connect pairs of milestones. If the simple planner returns
success, then an edge between the pair is added to the graph; otherwise, the graph remains as
is. We try to connect each milestone either to its k nearest neighbors (we call this k-PRM), or
to all milestones in a sphere of a radius r. Finally, the algorithm searches for a path on this


954
Chapter 26
Robotics
qg
qg
qg
qg
qs
qs
qs
qs
Figure 26.17 The probabilistic roadmap (PRM) algorithm. Top left: the start and goal con-
ﬁgurations. Top right: sample M collision-free milestones (here M = 5). Bottom left: con-
nect each milestone to its k nearest neighbors (here k = 3). Bottom right: ﬁnd the shortest
path from the start to the goal on the resulting graph.
graph from qs to qg. If no path is found, then M more milestones are sampled, added to the
graph, and the process is repeated.
Figure 26.17 shows a roadmap with the path found between two conﬁgurations. PRMs
are not complete, but they are what is called probabilistically complete—they will eventu-
Probabilistically
complete
ally ﬁnd a path, if one exists. Intuitively, this is because they keep sampling more milestones.
PRMs work well even in high-dimensional conﬁguration spaces.
PRMs are also popular for multi-query planning, in which we have multiple motion
Multi-query planning
planning problems within the same C-space. Often, once the robot reaches a goal, it is called
upon to reach another goal in the same workspace. PRMs are really useful, because the robot
can dedicate time up front to constructing a roadmap, and amortize the use of that roadmap
over multiple queries.
Rapidly-exploring random trees
An extension of PRMs called rapidly exploring random trees (RRTs) is popular for single-
Rapidly exploring
random trees
(RRTs)
query planning. We incrementally build two trees, one with qs as the root and one with qg
as the root. Random milestones are chosen, and an attempt is made to connect each new
milestone to the existing trees. If a milestone connects both trees, that means a solution has
been found, as in Figure 26.18. If not, the algorithm ﬁnds the closest point in each tree and
adds to the tree a new edge that extends from the point by a distance δ towards the milestone.
This tends to grow the tree towards previously unexplored sections of the space.
Roboticists love RRTs for their ease of use. However, RRT solutions are typically nonop-
timal and lack smoothness. Therefore, RRTs are often followed by a post-processing step.
The most common one is “short-cutting,” in which we randomly select one of the vertices on
the solution path and try to remove it by connecting its neighbors to each other (via the simple


Section 26.5
Planning and Control
955
qg
qs
qsample
Figure 26.18 The bidirectional RRT algorithm constructs two trees (one from the start, the
other from the goal) by incrementally connecting each sample to the closest node in each
tree, if the connection is possible. When a sample connects to both trees, that means we have
found a solution path.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 26.19 Snapshots of a trajectory produced by an RRT and post-processed with short-
cutting. Courtesy of Anca Dragan.
planner). We do this repeatedly for as many steps as we have compute time for. Even then,
the trajectories might look a little unnatural due to the random positions of the milestone that
were selected, as shown in Figure 26.19.
RRT∗is a modiﬁcation to RRT that makes the algorithm asymptotically optimal: the
RRT∗
solution converges to the optimal solution as more and more milestones are sampled. The
key idea is to pick the nearest neighbor based on a notion of cost to come rather than distance
from the milestone only, and to rewire the tree, swapping parents of older vertices if it is
cheaper to reach them via the new milestone.
Trajectory optimization for kinematic planning
Randomized sampling algorithms tend to ﬁrst construct a complex but feasible path and then
optimize it. Trajectory optimization does the opposite: it starts with a simple but infeasible
path, and then works to push it out of collision. The goal is to ﬁnd a path that optimizes a cost


