CHAPTER 26
ROBOTICS
In which agents are endowed with sensors and physical effectors with which to move about
and make mischief in the real world.
26.1 Robots
Robots are physical agents that perform tasks by manipulating the physical world. To do
Robot
so, they are equipped with effectors such as legs, wheels, joints, and grippers. Effectors are
Eﬀector
designed to assert physical forces on the environment. When they do this, a few things may
happen: the robot’s state might change (e.g., a car spins its wheels and makes progress on the
road as a result), the state of the environment might change (e.g., a robot arm uses its gripper
to push a mug across the counter), and even the state of the people around the robot might
change (e.g., an exoskeleton moves and that changes the conﬁguration of a person’s leg; or
a mobile robot makes progress toward the elevator doors, and a person notices and is nice
enough to move out of the way, or even push the button for the robot).
Robots are also equipped with sensors, which enable them to perceive their environment.
Sensor
Present-day robotics employs a diverse set of sensors, including cameras, radars, lasers, and
microphones to measure the state of the environment and of the people around it; and gyro-
scopes, strain and torque sensors, and accelerometers to measure the robot’s own state.
Maximizing expected utility for a robot means choosing how to actuate its effectors to
assert the right physical forces—the ones that will lead to changes in state that accumulate as
much expected reward as possible. Ultimately, robots are trying to accomplish some task in
the physical world.
Robots operate in environments that are partially observable and stochastic: cameras
cannot see around corners, and gears can slip. Moreover, the people acting in that same
environment are unpredictable, so the robot needs to make predictions about them.
Robots usually model their environment with a continuous state space (the robot’s po-
sition has continuous coordinates) and a continuous action space (the amount of current a
robot sends to its motor is also measured in continuous units). Some robots operate in high-
dimensional spaces: cars need to know the position, orientation, and velocity of themselves
and the nearby agents; robot arms have six or seven joints that can each be independently
moved; and robots that mimic the human body have hundreds of joints.
Robotic learning is constrained because the real world stubbornly refuses to operate faster
than real time. In a simulated environment, it is possible to use learning algorithms (such as
the Q-learning algorithm described in Chapter 23) to learn in a few hours from millions of
trials. In a real environment, it might take years to run these trials, and the robot cannot risk
(and thus cannot learn from) a trial that might cause harm. Thus, transferring what has been


Section 26.2
Robot Hardware
933
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.1 (a) An industrial robotic arm with a custom end-effector. Image credit: Ma-
cor/123RF. (b) A Kinova® JACO® Assistive Robot arm mounted on a wheelchair. Kinova
and JACO are trademarks of Kinova, Inc.
learned in simulation to a real robot in the real world—the sim-to-real problem—is an active
area of research. Practical robotic systems need to embody prior knowledge about the robot,
the physical environment, and the tasks to be performed so that the robot can learn quickly
and perform safely.
Robotics brings together many of the concepts we have seen in this book, including prob-
abilistic state estimation, perception, planning, unsupervised learning, reinforcement learn-
ing, and game theory. For some of these concepts robotics serves as a challenging example
application. For other concepts this chapter breaks new ground, for instance in introducing
the continuous version of techniques that we previously saw only in the discrete case.
26.2 Robot Hardware
So far in this book, we have taken the agent architecture—sensors, effectors, and processors—
as given, and have concentrated on the agent program. But the success of real robots depends
at least as much on the design of sensors and effectors that are appropriate for the task.
26.2.1 Types of robots from the hardware perspective
When you think of a robot, you might imagine something with a head and two arms, moving
around on legs or wheels. Such anthropomorphic robots have been popularized in ﬁction
Anthropomorphic
robot
such as the movie The Terminator and the cartoon The Jetsons. But real robots come in many
shapes and sizes.
Manipulators are just robot arms. They do not necessarily have to be attached to a robot
Manipulator
body; they might simply be bolted onto a table or a ﬂoor, as they are in factories (Figure 26.1
(a)). Some have a large payload, like those assembling cars, while others, like wheelchair-
mountable arms that assist people with motor impairments (Figure 26.1(b)), can carry less
but are safer in human environments.


934
Chapter 26
Robotics
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.2 (a) NASA’s Curiosity rover taking a selﬁe on Mars. Image courtesy of NASA.
(b) A Skydio drone accompanying a family on a bike ride. Image courtesy of Skydio.
Mobile robots are those that use wheels, legs, or rotors to move about the environment.
Mobile robot
Quadcopter drones are a type of unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV); autonomous underwa-
Quadcopter drone
UAV
ter vehicles (AUVs) roam the oceans. But many mobile robots stay indoors and move on
AUV
wheels, like a vacuum cleaner or a towel delivery robot in a hotel. Their outdoor counterparts
include autonomous cars or rovers that explore new terrain, even on the surface of Mars
Autonomous car
Rover
(Figure 26.2). Finally, legged robots are meant to traverse rough terrain that is inaccessible
Legged robot
with wheels. The downside is that controlling legs to do the right thing is more challenging
than spinning wheels.
Other kinds of robots include prostheses, exoskeletons, robots with wings, swarms, and
intelligent environments in which the robot is the entire room.
26.2.2 Sensing the world
Sensors are the perceptual interface between robot and environment. Passive sensors, such
Passive sensor
as cameras, are true observers of the environment: they capture signals that are generated
by other sources in the environment. Active sensors, such as sonar, send energy into the
Active sensor
environment. They rely on the fact that this energy is reﬂected back to the sensor. Active
sensors tend to provide more information than passive sensors, but at the expense of increased
power consumption and with a danger of interference when multiple active sensors are used
at the same time. We also distinguish whether a sensor is directed at sensing the environment,
the robot’s location, or the robot’s internal conﬁguration.
Range ﬁnders are sensors that measure the distance to nearby objects. Sonar sensors
Range ﬁnder
Sonar
are active range ﬁnders that emit directional sound waves, which are reﬂected by objects,
with some of the sound making it back to the sensor. The time and intensity of the returning
signal indicates the distance to nearby objects. Sonar is the technology of choice for au-
tonomous underwater vehicles, and was popular in the early days of indoor robotics. Stereo
vision (see Section 27.6) relies on multiple cameras to image the environment from slightly
Stereo vision


Section 26.2
Robot Hardware
935
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.3 (a) Time-of-ﬂight camera; image courtesy of Mesa Imaging GmbH. (b) 3D
range image obtained with this camera. The range image makes it possible to detect obstacles
and objects in a robot’s vicinity. Image courtesy of Willow Garage, LLC.
different viewpoints, analyzing the resulting parallax in these images to compute the range of
surrounding objects.
For mobile ground robots, sonar and stereo vision are now rarely used, because they are
not reliably accurate. The Kinect is a popular low-cost sensor that combines a camera and a
structured light projector, which projects a pattern of grid lines onto a scene. The camera
Structured light
sees how the grid lines bend, giving the robot information about the shape of the objects in
the scene. If desired, the projection can be infrared light, so as not to interfere with other
sensors (such as human eyes).
Most ground robots are now equipped with active optical range ﬁnders. Just like sonar
sensors, optical range sensors emit active signals (light) and measure the time until a reﬂection
of this signal arrives back at the sensor. Figure 26.3(a) shows a time-of-ﬂight camera. This
Time-of-ﬂight
camera
camera acquires range images like the one shown in Figure 26.3(b) at up to 60 frames per
second. Autonomous cars often use scanning lidars (short for light detection and ranging)—
Scanning lidar
active sensors that emit laser beams and sense the reﬂected beam, giving range measurements
accurate to within a centimeter at a range of 100 meters. They use complex arrangements of
mirrors or rotating elements to sweep the beam across the environment and build a map.
Scanning lidars tend to work better than time-of-ﬂight cameras at longer ranges, and tend to
perform better in bright daylight.
Radar is often the range ﬁnding sensor of choice for air vehicles (autonomous or not).
Radar
Radar sensors can measure distances up to kilometers, and have an advantage over optical
sensors in that they can see through fog. On the close end of range sensing are tactile sensors
Tactile sensor
such as whiskers, bump panels, and touch-sensitive skin. These sensors measure range based
on physical contact, and can be deployed only for sensing objects very close to the robot.
A second important class is location sensors. Most location sensors use range sensing
Location sensor
as a primary component to determine location. Outdoors, the Global Positioning System
Global Positioning
System
(GPS) is the most common solution to the localization problem. GPS measures the distance to


936
Chapter 26
Robotics
satellites that emit pulsed signals. At present, there are 31 operational GPS satellites in orbit,
and 24 GLONASS satellites, the Russian counterpart. GPS receivers can recover the distance
to a satellite by analyzing phase shifts. By triangulating signals from multiple satellites, GPS
receivers can determine their absolute location on Earth to within a few meters. Differential
GPS involves a second ground receiver with known location, providing millimeter accuracy
Diﬀerential GPS
under ideal conditions.
Unfortunately, GPS does not work indoors or underwater. Indoors, localization is often
achieved by attaching beacons in the environment at known locations. Many indoor environ-
ments are full of wireless base stations, which can help robots localize through the analysis of
the wireless signal. Underwater, active sonar beacons can provide a sense of location, using
sound to inform AUVs of their relative distances to those beacons.
The third important class is proprioceptive sensors, which inform the robot of its own
Proprioceptive
sensor
motion. To measure the exact conﬁguration of a robotic joint, motors are often equipped with
shaft decoders that accurately measure the angular motion of a shaft. On robot arms, shaft
Shaft decoder
decoders help track the position of joints. On mobile robots, shaft decoders report wheel rev-
olutions for odometry—the measurement of distance traveled. Unfortunately, wheels tend to
Odometry
drift and slip, so odometry is accurate only over short distances. External forces, such as wind
and ocean currents, increase positional uncertainty. Inertial sensors, such as gyroscopes, re-
Inertial sensor
duce uncertainty by relying on the resistance of mass to the change of velocity.
Other important aspects of robot state are measured by force sensors and torque sensors.
Force sensor
Torque sensor
These are indispensable when robots handle fragile objects or objects whose exact size and
shape are unknown. Imagine a one-ton robotic manipulator screwing in a light bulb. It would
be all too easy to apply too much force and break the bulb. Force sensors allow the robot
to sense how hard it is gripping the bulb, and torque sensors allow it to sense how hard it is
turning. High-quality sensors can measure forces in all three translational and three rotational
directions. They do this at a frequency of several hundred times a second so that a robot can
quickly detect unexpected forces and correct its actions before it breaks a light bulb. However,
it can be a challenge to outﬁt a robot with high-end sensors and the computational power to
monitor them.
26.2.3 Producing motion
The mechanism that initiates the motion of an effector is called an actuator; examples include
Actuator
transmissions, gears, cables, and linkages. The most common type of actuator is the electric
actuator, which uses electricity to spin up a motor. These are predominantly used in systems
that need rotational motion, like joints on a robot arm. Hydraulic actuators use pressurized
Hydraulic actuator
hydraulic ﬂuid (like oil or water) and pneumatic actuators use compressed air to generate
Pneumatic actuator
mechanical motion.
Actuators are often used to move joints, which connect rigid bodies (links). Arms and
legs have such joints. In revolute joints, one link rotates with respect to the other. In pris-
Revolute joint
matic joints, one link slides along the other. Both of these are single-axis joints (one axis
Prismatic joint
of motion). Other kinds of joints include spherical, cylindrical, and planar joints, which are
multi-axis joints.
To interact with objects in the environment, robots use grippers. The most basic type
of gripper is the parallel jaw gripper, with two ﬁngers and a single actuator that moves
Parallel jaw gripper
the ﬁngers together to grasp objects. This effector is both loved and hated for its simplicity.


Section 26.3
What kind of problem is robotics solving?
937
Three-ﬁngered grippers offer slightly more ﬂexibility while maintaining simplicity. At the
other end of the spectrum are humanoid (anthropomorphic) hands. For instance, the Shadow
Dexterous Hand has a total of 20 actuators. This offers a lot more ﬂexibility for complex
manipulation, including in-hand manipulator maneuvers (think of picking up your cell phone
and rotating it in-hand to orient it right-side up), but this ﬂexibility comes at a price—learning
to control these complex grippers is more challenging.
26.3 What kind of problem is robotics solving?
Now that we know what the robot hardware might be, we’re ready to consider the agent
software that drives the hardware to achieve our goals. We ﬁrst need to decide the computa-
tional framework for this agent. We have talked about search in deterministic environments,
MDPs for stochastic but fully observable environments, POMDPs for partial observability,
and games for situations in which the agent is not acting in isolation. Given a computational
framework, we need to instantiate its ingredients: reward or utility functions, states, actions,
observation spaces, etc.
We have already noted that robotics problems are nondeterministic, partially observable,
and multiagent. Using the game-theoretic notions from Chapter 17, we can see that some-
times the agents are cooperative and sometimes they are competitive. In a narrow corridor
where only one agent can go ﬁrst, a robot and a person collaborate because they both want
to make sure they don’t bump into each other. But in some cases they might compete a bit to
reach their destination quickly. If the robot is too polite and always makes room, it might get
stuck in crowded situations and never reach its goal.
Therefore, when robots act in isolation and know their environment, the problem they
are solving can be formulated as an MDP; when they are missing information it becomes a
POMDP; and when they act around people it can often be formulated as a game.
What is the robot’s reward function in this formulation? Usually the robot is acting in
service of a human—for example delivering a meal to a hospital patient for the patient’s
reward, not its own. For most robotics settings, even though robot designers might try to
specify a good enough proxy reward function, the true reward function lies with the user
whom the robot is supposed to help. The robot will either need to decipher the user’s desires,
or rely on an engineer to specify an approximation of the user’s desires.
As for the robot’s action, state, and observation spaces, the most general form is that
observations are raw sensor feeds (e.g., the images coming in from cameras, or the laser hits
coming in from lidar); actions are raw electric currents being sent to the motors; and state is
what the robot needs to know for its decision making. This means there is a huge gap between
the low-level percepts and motor controls, and the high-level plans the robot needs to make.
To bridge the gap, roboticists decouple aspects of the problem to simplify it.
For instance, we know that when we solve POMDPs properly, perception and action
interact: perception informs which actions make sense, but action also informs perception,
with agents taking actions to gather information when that information has value in later
time steps. However, robots often separate perception from action, consuming the outputs
of perception and pretending they will not get any more information in the future. Further,
hierarchical planning is called for, because a high-level goal like “get to the cafeteria” is far
removed from a motor command like “rotate the main axle 1 ◦,”


