938
Chapter 26
Robotics
In robotics we often use a three-level hierarchy. The task planning level decides a plan
Task planning
or policy for high-level actions, sometimes called action primitives or subgoals: move to the
door, open it, go to the elevator, press the button, etc. Then motion planning is in charge of
ﬁnding a path that gets the robot from one point to another, achieving each subgoal. Finally,
control is used to achieve the planned motion using the robot’s actuators. Since the task
Control
planning level is typically deﬁned over discrete states and actions, in this chapter we will
focus primarily on motion planning and control.
Separately, preference learning is in charge of estimating an end user’s objective, and
Preference learning
people prediction is used to forecast the actions of other people in the robot’s environment.
People prediction
All these combine to determine the robot’s behavior.
Whenever we split a problem into separate pieces we reduce complexity, but we give up
opportunities for the pieces to help each other. Action can help improve perception, and also
determine what kind of perception is useful. Similarly, decisions at the motion level might
not be the best when accounting for how that motion will be tracked; or decisions at the task
level might render the task plan uninstantiatable at the motion level. So, with progress in
these separate areas comes the push to reintegrate them: to do motion planning and control
together, to do task and motion planning together, and to reintegrate perception, prediction,
and action—closing the feedback loop. Robotics today is about continuing progress in each
area while also building on this progress to achieve better integration.
26.4 Robotic Perception
Perception is the process by which robots map sensor measurements into internal representa-
tions of the environment. Much of it uses the computer vision techniques from the previous
chapter. But perception for robotics must deal with additional sensors like lidar and tactile
sensors.
Perception is difﬁcult because sensors are noisy and the environment is partially observ-
able, unpredictable, and often dynamic. In other words, robots have all the problems of state
estimation (or ﬁltering) that we discussed in Section 14.2. As a rule of thumb, good internal
representations for robots have three properties:
1. They contain enough information for the robot to make good decisions.
2. They are structured so that they can be updated efﬁciently.
3. They are natural in the sense that internal variables correspond to natural state variables
in the physical world.
In Chapter 14, we saw that Kalman ﬁlters, HMMs, and dynamic Bayes nets can represent the
transition and sensor models of a partially observable environment, and we described both
exact and approximate algorithms for updating the belief state—the posterior probability
distribution over the environment state variables. Several dynamic Bayes net models for
this process were shown in Chapter 14. For robotics problems, we include the robot’s own
past actions as observed variables in the model. Figure 26.4 shows the notation used in this
chapter: Xt is the state of the environment (including the robot) at time t, Zt is the observation
received at time t, and At is the action taken after the observation is received.
We would like to compute the new belief state, P(Xt+1 | z1:t+1,a1:t), from the current
belief state, P(Xt | z1:t,a1:t−1), and the new observation zt+1. We did this in Section 14.2,


Section 26.4
Robotic Perception
939
Figure 26.4 Robot perception can be viewed as temporal inference from sequences of ac-
tions and measurements, as illustrated by this dynamic decision network.
but there are two differences here: we condition on the actions as well as the observations,
and we deal with continuous rather than discrete variables. Thus, we modify the recursive
ﬁltering equation (14.5 on page 485) to use integration rather than summation:
P(Xt+1 | z1:t+1,a1:t)
= αP(zt+1 | Xt+1)
Z
P(Xt+1 | xt,at) P(xt | z1:t,a1:t−1) dxt .
(26.1)
This equation states that the posterior over the state variables X at time t + 1 is calculated
recursively from the corresponding estimate one time step earlier. This calculation involves
the previous action at and the current sensor measurement zt+1. For example, if our goal is
to develop a soccer-playing robot, Xt+1 might include the location of the soccer ball relative
to the robot. The posterior P(Xt |z1:t,a1:t−1) is a probability distribution over all states that
captures what we know from past sensor measurements and controls. Equation (26.1) tells us
how to recursively estimate this location, by incrementally folding in sensor measurements
(e.g., camera images) and robot motion commands. The probability P(Xt+1 | xt,at) is called
the transition model or motion model, and P(zt+1 | Xt+1) is the sensor model.
Motion model
26.4.1 Localization and mapping
Localization is the problem of ﬁnding out where things are—including the robot itself. To
Localization
keep things simple, let us consider a mobile robot that moves slowly in a ﬂat two-dimensional
world. Let us also assume the robot is given an exact map of the environment. (An example
of such a map appears in Figure 26.7.) The pose of such a mobile robot is deﬁned by its
two Cartesian coordinates with values x and y and its heading with value θ, as illustrated in
Figure 26.5(a). If we arrange those three values in a vector, then any particular state is given
by Xt =(xt,yt,θt)⊤. So far so good.
In the kinematic approximation, each action consists of the “instantaneous” speciﬁcation
of two velocities—a translational velocity vt and a rotational velocity ωt. For small time
intervals ∆t, a crude deterministic model of the motion of such robots is given by
ˆXt+1 = f(Xt,vt,ωt
|{z}
at
) = Xt +


vt∆t cosθt
vt∆t sinθt
ωt∆t

.


940
Chapter 26
Robotics
xi, yi
vt ¢t
xt11
h(xt)
xt
t11
t ¢t
ut
u
v
Z1
Z2
Z3
Z4
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.5 (a) A simpliﬁed kinematic model of a mobile robot. The robot is shown as a
circle with an interior radius line marking the forward direction. The state xt consists of the
(xt,yt) position (shown implicitly) and the orientation θt. The new state xt+1 is obtained by
an update in position of vt∆t and in orientation of ωt∆t. Also shown is a landmark at (xi,yi)
observed at time t. (b) The range-scan sensor model. Two possible robot poses are shown for
a given range scan (z1,z2,z3,z4). It is much more likely that the pose on the left generated
the range scan than the pose on the right.
The notation ˆX refers to a deterministic state prediction. Of course, physical robots are
somewhat unpredictable. This is commonly modeled by a Gaussian distribution with mean
f(Xt,vt,ωt) and covariance Σx. (See Appendix A for a mathematical deﬁnition.)
P(Xt+1 | Xt,vt,ωt) = N( ˆXt+1,Σx).
This probability distribution is the robot’s motion model. It models the effects of the motion
at on the location of the robot.
Next, we need a sensor model. We will consider two kinds of sensor models. The ﬁrst
assumes that the sensors detect stable, recognizable features of the environment called land-
marks. For each landmark, the range and bearing are reported. Suppose the robot’s state
Landmark
is xt =(xt,yt,θt)⊤and it senses a landmark whose location is known to be (xi,yi)⊤. With-
out noise, a prediction of the range and bearing can be calculated by simple geometry (see
Figure 26.5(a)):
ˆzt = h(xt) =
 p
(xt −xi)2 +(yt −yi)2
arctan yi−yt
xi−xt −θt
!
.
Again, noise distorts our measurements. To keep things simple, assume Gaussian noise with
covariance Σz, giving us the sensor model
P(zt | xt) = N(ˆzt,Σz).
A somewhat different sensor model is used for a sensor array of range sensors, each of
Sensor array
which has a ﬁxed bearing relative to the robot. Such sensors produce a vector of range values
zt = (z1,...,zM)⊤.
Given a pose xt, let ˆzj be the computed range along the jth beam direction from xt to the
nearest obstacle. As before, this will be corrupted by Gaussian noise. Typically, we assume


Section 26.4
Robotic Perception
941
function MONTE-CARLO-LOCALIZATIONa, z, N, P(X′|X, v, ω), P(z|z∗), map
returns a set of samples, S, for the next time step
inputs: a, robot velocities v and ω
z, a vector of M range scan data points
P(X′|X, v, ω), motion model
P(z|z∗), a range sensor noise model
map, a 2D map of the environment
persistent: S, a vector of N samples
local variables: W, a vector of N weights
S′, a temporary vector of N samples
if S is empty then
for i = 1 to N do
// initialization phase
S[i]←sample from P(X0)
for i = 1 to N do
// update cycle
S′[i]←sample from P(X′|X = S[i],v,ω)
W[i]←1
for j = 1 to M do
z∗←RAYCAST( j, X = S′[i], map)
W[i]←W[i] · P(z j| z∗)
S←WEIGHTED-SAMPLE-WITH-REPLACEMENT(N, S′, W)
return S
Figure 26.6 A Monte Carlo localization algorithm using a range-scan sensor model with
independent noise.
that the errors for the different beam directions are independent and identically distributed,
so we have
P(zt | xt) = α
M
∏
j=1
e−(zj−ˆzj)/2σ2.
Figure 26.5(b) shows an example of a four-beam range scan and two possible robot poses,
one of which is reasonably likely to have produced the observed scan and one of which is not.
Comparing the range-scan model to the landmark model, we see that the range-scan model
has the advantage that there is no need to identify a landmark before the range scan can be
interpreted; indeed, in Figure 26.5(b), the robot faces a featureless wall. On the other hand,
if there are visible, identiﬁable landmarks, they may provide instant localization.
Section 14.4 described the Kalman ﬁlter, which represents the belief state as a single
multivariate Gaussian, and the particle ﬁlter, which represents the belief state by a collection
of particles that correspond to states. Most modern localization algorithms use one of these
two representations of the robot’s belief P(Xt | z1:t,a1:t−1).
Localization using particle ﬁltering is called Monte Carlo localization, or MCL. The
Monte Carlo
localization
MCL algorithm is an instance of the particle-ﬁltering algorithm of Figure 14.17 (page 510).
All we need to do is supply the appropriate motion model and sensor model. Figure 26.6
shows one version using the range-scan sensor model. The operation of the algorithm is
illustrated in Figure 26.7 as the robot ﬁnds out where it is inside an ofﬁce building. In the ﬁrst
image, the particles are uniformly distributed based on the prior, indicating global uncertainty


942
Chapter 26
Robotics
about the robot’s position. In the second image, the ﬁrst set of measurements arrives and the
particles form clusters in the areas of high posterior belief. In the third, enough measurements
are available to push all the particles to a single location.
The Kalman ﬁlter is the other major way to localize. A Kalman ﬁlter represents the
posterior P(Xt | z1:t,a1:t−1) by a Gaussian. The mean of this Gaussian will be denoted µt and
its covariance Σt. The main problem with Gaussian beliefs is that they are closed only under
linear motion models f and linear measurement models h. For nonlinear f or h, the result of
updating a ﬁlter is in general not Gaussian. Thus, localization algorithms using the Kalman
ﬁlter linearize the motion and sensor models. Linearization is a local approximation of a
Linearization
nonlinear function by a linear function. Figure 26.8 illustrates the concept of linearization
for a (one-dimensional) robot motion model. On the left, it depicts a nonlinear motion model
f(xt,at) (the control at is omitted in this graph since it plays no role in the linearization). On
the right, this function is approximated by a linear function ˜f(xt,at). This linear function is
tangent to f at the point µt, the mean of our state estimate at time t. Such a linearization
is called ﬁrst degree Taylor expansion. A Kalman ﬁlter that linearizes f and h via Taylor
Taylor expansion
expansion is called an extended Kalman ﬁlter (or EKF). Figure 26.9 shows a sequence of
estimates of a robot running an extended Kalman ﬁlter localization algorithm.
As the robot moves, the uncertainty in its location estimate increases, as shown by the
error ellipses. Its error decreases as it senses the range and bearing to a landmark with known
location and increases again as the robot loses sight of the landmark. EKF algorithms work
well if landmarks are easily identiﬁed. Otherwise, the posterior distribution may be multi-
modal, as in Figure 26.7(b). The problem of needing to know the identity of landmarks is an
instance of the data association problem discussed in Figure 18.3.
In some situations, no map of the environment is available. Then the robot will have to
acquire a map. This is a bit of a chicken-and-egg problem: the navigating robot will have to
determine its location relative to a map it doesn’t quite know, at the same time building this
map while it doesn’t quite know its actual location. This problem is important for many robot
applications, and it has been studied extensively under the name simultaneous localization
and mapping, abbreviated as SLAM.
Simultaneous
localization and
mapping
SLAM problems are solved using many different probabilistic techniques, including the
extended Kalman ﬁlter discussed above. Using the EKF is straightforward: just augment
the state vector to include the locations of the landmarks in the environment. Luckily, the
EKF update scales quadratically, so for small maps (e.g., a few hundred landmarks) the com-
putation is quite feasible. Richer maps are often obtained using graph relaxation methods,
similar to the Bayesian network inference techniques discussed in Chapter 13. Expectation–
maximization is also used for SLAM.
26.4.2 Other types of perception
Not all of robot perception is about localization or mapping. Robots also perceive temper-
ature, odors, sound, and so on. Many of these quantities can be estimated using variants of
dynamic Bayes networks. All that is required for such estimators are conditional probability
distributions that characterize the evolution of state variables over time, and sensor models
that describe the relation of measurements to state variables.
It is also possible to program a robot as a reactive agent, without explicitly reasoning
about probability distributions over states. We cover that approach in Section 26.9.1.


Section 26.4
Robotic Perception
943
Robot position
(a)
Robot position
(b)
Robot position
(c)
Figure 26.7 Monte Carlo localization, a particle ﬁltering algorithm for mobile robot localiza-
tion. (a) Initial, global uncertainty. (b) Approximately bimodal uncertainty after navigating
in the (symmetric) corridor. (c) Unimodal uncertainty after entering a room and ﬁnding it to
be distinctive.


