980
Chapter 26
Robotics
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.36 (a) A robot mapping an abandoned coal mine. (b) A 3D map of the mine
acquired by the robot. Courtesy of Sebastian Thrun.
Figure 26.35(a) depicts BOSS, which in 2007 won the DARPA Urban Challenge, a compli-
cated road race on city streets where robots faced other robots and had to obey trafﬁc rules.
In 2009, Google started an autonomous driving project (featuring many of the researchers
who had worked on Stanley and BOSS), which has now spun off as Waymo. In 2018 Waymo
started driverless testing (with nobody in the driver seat) in the suburbs of Pheonix, Ari-
zona. In the meantime, other autonomous driving companies and ride-sharing companies
are working on developing their own technology, while car manufacturers have been selling
cars with more and more assistive intelligence, such as Tesla’s driver assist, which is meant
Driver assist
for highway driving. Other companies are targeting non-highway driving applications in-
cluding college campuses and retirement communities. Still other companies are focused on
non-passenger applications such as trucking, grocery delivery, and valet parking.
Entertainment: Disney has been using robots (under the name animatronics) in their
Animatronics
parks since 1963. Originally, these robots were restricted to hand-designed, open-loop, un-
varying motion (and speech), but since 2009 a version called autonomatronics can generate
Autonomatronics
autonomous actions. Robots also take the form of intelligent toys for children; for example,
Anki’s Cozmo plays games with children and may pound the table with frustration when it
loses. Finally, quadrotors like Skydio’s R1 from Figure 26.2(b) act as personal photographers
and videographers, following us around to take action shots as we ski or bike.
Exploration and hazardous environments: Robots have gone where no human has
gone before, including the surface of Mars. Robotic arms assist astronauts in deploying and
retrieving satellites and in building the International Space Station. Robots also help explore
under the sea. They are routinely used to acquire maps of sunken ships. Figure 26.36 shows
a robot mapping an abandoned coal mine, along with a 3D model of the mine acquired using
range sensors. In 1996, a team of researches released a legged robot into the crater of an
active volcano to acquire data for climate research. Robots are becoming very effective tools
for gathering information in domains that are difﬁcult (or dangerous) for people to access.
Robots have assisted people in cleaning up nuclear waste, most notably in Three Mile
Island, Chernobyl, and Fukushima. Robots were present after the collapse of the World Trade


Summary
981
Center, where they entered structures deemed too dangerous for human search and rescue
crews. Here too, these robots are initially deployed via teleoperation, and as technology
advances they are becoming more and more autonomous, with a human operator in charge
but not having to specify every single command.
Industry: The majority of robots today are deployed in factories, automating tasks that
are difﬁcult, dangerous, or dull for humans. (The majority of factory robots are in automobile
factories.) Automating these tasks is a positive in terms of efﬁciently producing what society
needs. At the same time, it also means displacing some human workers from their jobs. This
has important policy and economics implications—the need for retraining and education, the
need for a fair division of resources, etc. These topics are discussed further in Section 28.3.5.
Summary
Robotics is about physically embodied agents, which can change the state of the physical
world. In this chapter, we have learned the following:
• The most common types of robots are manipulators (robot arms) and mobile robots.
They have sensors for perceiving the world and actuators that produce motion, which
then affects the world via effectors.
• The general robotics problem involves stochasticity (which can be handled by MDPs),
partial observability (which can be handled by POMDPs), and acting with and around
other agents (which can be handled with game theory). The problem is made even
harder by the fact that most robots work in continuous and high-dimensional state and
action spaces. They also operate in the real world, which refuses to run faster than real
time and in which failures lead to real things being damaged, with no “undo” capability.
• Ideally, the robot would solve the entire problem in one go: observations in the form
of raw sensor feeds go in, and actions in the form of torques or currents to the motors
come out. In practice though, this is too daunting, and roboticists typically decouple
different aspects of the problem and treat them independently.
• We typically separate perception (estimation) from action (motion generation). Percep-
tion in robotics involves computer vision to recognize the surroundings through cam-
eras, but also localization and mapping.
• Robotic perception concerns itself with estimating decision-relevant quantities from
sensor data. To do so, we need an internal representation and a method for updating
this internal representation over time.
• Probabilistic ﬁltering algorithms such as particle ﬁlters and Kalman ﬁlters are useful
for robot perception. These techniques maintain the belief state, a posterior distribution
over state variables.
• For generating motion, we use conﬁguration spaces, where a point speciﬁes everything
we need to know to locate every body point on the robot. For instance, for a robot arm
with two joints, a conﬁguration consists of the two joint angles.
• We typically decouple the motion generation problem into motion planning, concerned
with producing a plan, and trajectory tracking control, concerned with producing a
policy for control inputs (actuator commands) that results in executing the plan.


982
Chapter 26
Robotics
• Motion planning can be solved via graph search using cell decomposition; using ran-
domized motion planning algorithms, which sample milestones in the continuous
conﬁguration space; or using trajectory optimization, which can iteratively push a
straight-line path out of collision by leveraging a signed distance ﬁeld.
• A path found by a search algorithm can be executed using the path as the reference
trajectory for a PID controller, which constantly corrects for errors between where the
robot is and where it is supposed to be, or via computed torque control, which adds a
feedforward term that makes use of inverse dynamics to compute roughly what torque
to send to make progress along the trajectory.
• Optimal control unites motion planning and trajectory tracking by computing an op-
timal trajectory directly over control inputs. This is especially easy when we have
quadratic costs and linear dynamics, resulting in a linear quadratic regulator (LQR).
Popular methods make use of this by linearizing the dynamics and computing second-
order approximations of the cost (ILQR).
• Planning under uncertainty unites perception and action by online replanning (such as
model predictive control) and information gathering actions that aid perception.
• Reinforcement learning is applied in robotics, with techniques striving to reduce the
required number of interactions with the real world. Such techniques tend to exploit
models, be it estimating models and using them to plan, or training policies that are
robust with respect to different possible model parameters.
• Interaction with humans requires the ability to coordinate the robot’s actions with
theirs, which can be formulated as a game. We usually decompose the solution into
prediction, in which we use the person’s ongoing actions to estimate what they will
do in the future, and action, in which we use the predictions to compute the optimal
motion for the robot.
• Helping humans also requires the ability to learn or infer what they want. Robots can
approach this by learning the desired cost function they should optimize from human
input, such as demonstrations, corrections, or instruction in natural language. Alterna-
tively, robots can imitate human behavior, and use reinforcement learning to help tackle
the challenge of generalization to new states.
Bibliographical and Historical Notes
The word robot was popularized by Czech playwright Karel ˇCapek in his 1920 play R.U.R.
(Rossum’s Universal Robots). The robots, which were grown chemically rather than con-
structed mechanically, end up resenting their masters and decide to take over. It appears that
it was ˇCapek’s brother, Josef, who ﬁrst combined the Czech words “robota” (obligatory work)
and “robotnik” (serf) to yield “robot” in his 1917 short story Opilec (Glanc, 1978). The term
robotics was invented for a science ﬁction story (Asimov, 1950).
The idea of an autonomous machine predates the word “robot” by thousands of years. In
7th century BCE Greek mythology, a robot named Talos was built by Hephaistos, the Greek
god of metallurgy, to protect the island of Crete. The legend is that the sorceress Medea
defeated Talos by promising him immortality but then draining his life ﬂuid. Thus, this is the


Bibliographical and Historical Notes
983
ﬁrst example of a robot making a mistake in the process of changing its objective function.
In 322 BCE, Aristotle anticipated technological unemployment, speculating “If every tool,
when ordered, or even of its own accord, could do the work that beﬁts it...then there would
be no need either of apprentices for the master workers or of slaves for the lords.”
In the 3rd century BCE an actual humanoid robot called the Servant of Philon could pour
wine or water into a cup; a series of valves cut off the ﬂow at the right time. Wonderful
automata were built in the 18th century—Jacques Vaucanson’s mechanical duck from 1738
being one early example—but the complex behaviors they exhibited were entirely ﬁxed in
advance. Possibly the earliest example of a programmable robot-like device was the Jacquard
loom (1805), described on page 33.
Grey Walter’s “turtle,” built in 1948, could be considered the ﬁrst autonomous mobile
robot, although its control system was not programmable. The “Hopkins Beast,” built in
1960 at Johns Hopkins University, was much more sophisticated; it had sonar and photocell
sensors, pattern-recognition hardware, and could recognize the cover plate of a standard AC
power outlet. It was capable of searching for outlets, plugging itself in, and then recharging
its batteries! Still, the Beast had a limited repertoire of skills.
The ﬁrst general-purpose mobile robot was “Shakey,” developed at what was then the
Stanford Research Institute (now SRI) in the late 1960s (Fikes and Nilsson, 1971; Nilsson,
1984). Shakey was the ﬁrst robot to integrate perception, planning, and execution, and much
subsequent research in AI was inﬂuenced by this remarkable achievement. Shakey appears
on the cover of this book with project leader Charlie Rosen (1917–2002). Other inﬂuential
projects include the Stanford Cart and the CMU Rover (Moravec, 1983). Cox and Wilfong
(1990) describe classic work on autonomous vehicles.
The ﬁrst commercial robot was an arm called UNIMATE, for universal automation, de-
veloped by Joseph Engelberger and George Devol in their compnay, Unimation. In 1961, the
ﬁrst UNIMATE robot was sold to General Motors for use in manufacturing TV picture tubes.
1961 was also the year when Devol obtained the ﬁrst U.S. patent on a robot.
In 1973, Toyota and Nissan started using an updated version of UNIMATE for auto body
spot welding. This initiated a major revolution in automobile manufacturing that took place
mostly in Japan and the U.S., and that is still ongoing. Unimation followed up in 1978 with
the development of the Puma robot (Programmable Universal Machine for Assembly), which
was the de facto standard for robotic manipulation for the two decades that followed. About
500,000 robots are sold each year, with half of those going to the automotive industry.
In manipulation, the ﬁrst major effort at creating a hand–eye machine was Heinrich
Ernst’s MH-1, described in his MIT Ph.D. thesis (Ernst, 1961). The Machine Intelligence
project at Edinburgh also demonstrated an impressive early system for vision-based assem-
bly called FREDDY (Michie, 1972).
Research on mobile robotics has been stimulated by several important competitions.
AAAI’s annual mobile robot competition began in 1992. The ﬁrst competition winner was
CARMEL (Congdon et al., 1992). Progress has been steady and impressive: in recent com-
petitions robots entered the conference complex, found their way to the registration desk,
registered for the conference, and even gave a short talk.
The RoboCup competition, launched in 1995 by Kitano and colleagues (1997), aims
to “develop a team of fully autonomous humanoid robots that can win against the human
world champion team in soccer” by 2050. Some competitions use wheeled robots, some


984
Chapter 26
Robotics
humanoid robots, and some software simulations. Stone (2016) describes recent innovations
in RoboCup.
The DARPA Grand Challenge, organized by DARPA in 2004 and 2005, required au-
tonomous vehicles to travel more than 200 kilometers through the desert in less than ten
hours (Buehler et al., 2006). In the original event in 2004, no robot traveled more than eight
miles, leading many to believe the prize would never be claimed. In 2005, Stanford’s robot
Stanley won the competition in just under seven hours (Thrun, 2006). DARPA then orga-
nized the Urban Challenge, a competition in which robots had to navigate 60 miles in an
urban environment with other trafﬁc. Carnegie Mellon University’s robot BOSS took ﬁrst
place and claimed the $2 million prize (Urmson and Whittaker, 2008). Early pioneers in the
development of robotic cars included Dickmanns and Zapp (1987) and Pomerleau (1993).
The ﬁeld of robotic mapping has evolved from two distinct origins. The ﬁrst thread
began with work by Smith and Cheeseman (1986), who applied Kalman ﬁlters to the simulta-
neous localization and mapping (SLAM) problem. This algorithm was ﬁrst implemented by
Moutarlier and Chatila (1989) and later extended by Leonard and Durrant-Whyte (1992); see
Dissanayake et al. (2001) for an overview of early Kalman ﬁlter variations. The second thread
began with the development of the occupancy grid representation for probabilistic mapping,
Occupancy grid
which speciﬁes the probability that each (x,y) location is occupied by an obstacle (Moravec
and Elfes, 1985).
Kuipers and Levitt (1988) were among the ﬁrst to propose topological rather than metric
mapping, motivated by models of human spatial cognition. A seminal paper by Lu and Milios
(1997) recognized the sparseness of the simultaneous localization and mapping problem,
which gave rise to the development of nonlinear optimization techniques by Konolige (2004)
and Montemerlo and Thrun (2004), as well as hierarchical methods by Bosse et al. (2004).
Shatkay and Kaelbling (1997) and Thrun et al. (1998) introduced the EM algorithm into the
ﬁeld of robotic mapping for data association. An overview of probabilistic mapping methods
can be found in (Thrun et al., 2005).
Early mobile robot localization techniques are surveyed by Borenstein et al. (1996).
Although Kalman ﬁltering was well known as a localization method in control theory for
decades, the general probabilistic formulation of the localization problem did not appear in
the AI literature until much later, through the work of Tom Dean and colleagues (Dean et al.,
1990) and of Simmons and Koenig (1995). The latter work introduced the term Markov
localization. The ﬁrst real-world application of this technique was by Burgard et al. (1999),
Markov localization
through a series of robots that were deployed in museums. Monte Carlo localization based
on particle ﬁlters was developed by Fox et al. (1999) and is now widely used. The Rao-
Blackwellized particle ﬁlter combines particle ﬁltering for robot localization with exact
Rao-Blackwellized
particle ﬁlter
ﬁltering for map building (Murphy and Russell, 2001; Montemerlo et al., 2002).
A great deal of early work on motion planning focused on geometric algorithms for de-
terministic and fully observable motion planning problems. The PSPACE-hardness of robot
motion planning was shown in a seminal paper by Reif (1979). The conﬁguration space rep-
resentation is due to Lozano-Perez (1983). A series of papers by Schwartz and Sharir on what
they called piano movers problems (Schwartz et al., 1987) was highly inﬂuential.
Piano movers
Recursive cell decomposition for conﬁguration space planning was originated in the work
of Brooks and Lozano-Perez (1985) and improved signiﬁcantly by Zhu and Latombe (1991).
The earliest skeletonization algorithms were based on Voronoi diagrams (Rowat, 1979) and


Bibliographical and Historical Notes
985
visibility graphs (Wesley and Lozano-Perez, 1979). Guibas et al. (1992) developed efﬁcient
Visibility graph
techniques for calculating Voronoi diagrams incrementally, and Choset (1996) generalized
Voronoi diagrams to broader motion planning problems.
John Canny (1988) established the ﬁrst singly exponential algorithm for motion planning.
The seminal text by Latombe (1991) covers a variety of approaches to motion planning, as
do the texts by Choset et al. (2005) and LaValle (2006). Kavraki et al. (1996) developed the
theory of probabilistic roadmaps. Kuffner and LaValle (2000) developed rapidly exploring
random trees (RRTs).
Involving optimization in geometric motion planning began with elastic bands (Quinlan
and Khatib, 1993), which reﬁne paths when the conﬁguration-space obstacles change. Ratliff
et al. (2009) formulated the idea as the solution to an optimal control problem, allowing
the initial trajectory to start in collision, and deforming it by mapping workspace obstacle
gradients via the Jacobian into the conﬁguration space. Schulman et al. (2013) proposed a
practical second-order alternative.
The control of robots as dynamical systems—whether for manipulation or navigation—
has generated a vast literature. While this chapter explained the basics of trajectory tracking
control and optimal control, it left out entire subﬁelds, including adaptive control, robust
control, and Lyapunov analysis. Rather than assuming everything about the system is known
a priori, adaptive control aims to adapt the dynamics parameters and/or the control law online.
Robust control, on the other hand, aims to design controllers that perform well in spite of
uncertainty and external disturbances.
Lyapunov analysis was originally developed in the 1890s for the stability analysis of
general nonlinear systems, but it was not until the early 1930s that control theorists realized
its true potential. With the development of optimization methods, Lyapunov analysis was
extended to control barrier functions, which lend themselves nicely to modern optimization
tools. These methods are widely used in modern robotics for real-time controller design and
safety analysis.
Crucial works in robotic control include a trilogy on impedance control by Hogan (1985)
and a general study of robot dynamics by Featherstone (1987). Dean and Wellman (1991)
were among the ﬁrst to try to tie together control theory and AI planning systems. Three clas-
sic textbooks on the mathematics of robot manipulation are due to Paul (1981), Craig (1989),
and Yoshikawa (1990). Control for manipulation is covered by Murray (2017).
The area of grasping is also important in robotics—the problem of determining a stable
grasp is quite difﬁcult (Mason and Salisbury, 1985). Competent grasping requires touch sens-
ing, or haptic feedback, to determine contact forces and detect slip (Fearing and Hollerbach,
Haptic feedback
1985). Understanding how to grasp the the wide variety of objects in the world is a daunting
task. (Bousmalis et al., 2017) describe a system that combines real-world experimentation
with simulations guided by sim-to-real transfer to produce robust grasping.
Potential-ﬁeld control, which attempts to solve the motion planning and control problems
simultaneously, was developed for robotics by Khatib (1986). In mobile robotics, this idea
was viewed as a practical solution to the collision avoidance problem, and was later extended
into an algorithm called vector ﬁeld histograms by Borenstein (1991).
Vector ﬁeld
histogram
ILQR is currently widely used at the intersection of motion planning and control and is
due to Li and Todorov (2004). It is a variant of the much older differential dynamic program-
ming technique (Jacobson and Mayne, 1970).


