1052
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
If robots have rights, then they should not be enslaved, and there is a question of whether
reprogramming them would be a kind of enslavement. Another ethical issue involves voting
rights: a rich person could buy thousands of robots and program them to cast thousands
of votes—should those votes count? If a robot clones itself, can they both vote? What is
the boundary between ballot stufﬁng and exercising free will, and when does robotic voting
violate the “one person, one vote” principle?
Ernie Davis argues for avoiding the dilemmas of robot consciousness by never building
robots that could possibly be considered conscious. This argument was previously made by
Joseph Weizenbaum in his book Computer Power and Human Reason (1976), and before that
by Julien de La Mettrie in L’Homme Machine (1748). Robots are tools that we create, to do
the tasks we direct them to do, and if we grant them personhood, we are just declining to take
responsibility for the actions of our own property: “I’m not at fault for my self-driving car
crash—the car did it itself.”
This issue takes a different turn if we develop human–robot hybrids. Of course we already
have humans enhanced by technology such as contact lenses, pacemakers, and artiﬁcial hips.
But adding computational protheses may blur the lines between human and machine.
28.3.7 AI Safety
Almost any technology has the potential to cause harm in the wrong hands, but with AI
and robotics, the hands might be operating on their own. Countless science ﬁction stories
have warned about robots or cyborgs running amok. Early examples include Mary Shelley’s
Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus (1818) and Karel ˇCapek’s play R.U.R. (1920), in
which robots conquer the world. In movies, we have The Terminator (1984) and The Matrix
(1999), which both feature robots trying to eliminate humans—the robopocalypse (Wilson,
Robopocalypse
2011). Perhaps robots are so often the villains because they represent the unknown, just like
the witches and ghosts of tales from earlier eras. We can hope that a robot that is smart
enough to ﬁgure out how to terminate the human race is also smart enough to ﬁgure out that
that was not the intended utility function; but in building intelligent systems, we want to rely
not just on hope, but on a design process with guarantees of safety.
It would be unethical to distribute an unsafe AI agent. We require our agents to avoid
accidents, to be resistant to adversarial attacks and malicious abuse, and in general to cause
beneﬁts, not harms. That is especially true as AI agents are deployed in safety-critical appli-
cations, such as driving cars, controlling robots in dangerous factory or construction settings,
and making life-or-death medical decisions.
There is a long history of safety engineering in traditional engineering ﬁelds. We know
Safety engineering
how to build bridges, airplanes, spacecraft, and power plants that are designed up front to
behave safely even when components of the system fail. The ﬁrst technique is failure modes
and effect analysis (FMEA): analysts consider each component of the system, and imagine
Failure modes and
eﬀect analysis
(FMEA)
every possible way the component could go wrong (for example, what if this bolt were to
snap?), drawing on past experience and on calculations based on the physical properties of
the component. Then the analysts work forward to see what would result from the failure.
If the result is severe (a section of the bridge could fall down) then the analysts alter the
design to mitigate the failure. (With this additional cross-member, the bridge can survive the
failure of any 5 bolts; with this backup server, the online service can survive a tsunami taking
out the primary server.) The technique of fault tree analysis (FTA) is used to make these
Fault tree analysis
(FTA)


Section 28.3
The Ethics of AI
1053
determinations: analysts build an AND/OR tree of possible failures and assign probabilities
to each root cause, allowing for calculations of overall failure probability. These techniques
can and should be applied to all safety-critical engineered systems, including AI systems.
The ﬁeld of software engineering is aimed at producing reliable software, but the em-
phasis has historically been on correctness, not safety. Correctness means that the software
faithfully implements the speciﬁcation. But safety goes beyond that to insist that the speciﬁ-
cation has considered any feasible failure modes, and is designed to degrade gracefully even
in the face of unforeseen failures. For example, the software for a self-driving car wouldn’t
be considered safe unless it can handle unusual situations. For example, what if the power to
the main computer dies? A safe system will have a backup computer with a separate power
supply. What if a tire is punctured at high speed? A safe system will have tested for this, and
will have software to correct for the resulting loss of control.
An agent designed as a utility maximizer, or as a goal achiever, can be unsafe if it has
the wrong objective function. Suppose we give a robot the task of fetching a coffee from
the kitchen. We might run into trouble with unintended side effects—the robot might rush
Unintended side
eﬀect
to accomplish the goal, knocking over lamps and tables along the way. In testing, we might
notice this kind of behavior and modify the utility function to penalize such damage, but it is
difﬁcult for the designers and testers to anticipate all possible side effects ahead of time.
One way to deal with this is to design a robot to have low impact (Armstrong and Levin-
Low impact
stein, 2017): instead of just maximizing utility, maximize the utility minus a weighted sum-
mary of all changes to the state of the world. In this way, all other things being equal, the
robot prefers not to change those things whose effect on utility is unknown; so it avoids
knocking over the lamp not because it knows speciﬁcally that knocking the lamp will cause
it to fall over and break, but because it knows in general that disruption might be bad. This
can be seen as a version of the physician’s creed “ﬁrst, do no harm,” or as an analog to regu-
larization in machine learning: we want a policy that achieves goals, but we prefer policies
that take smooth, low-impact actions to get there. The trick is how to measure impact. It
is not acceptable to knock over a fragile lamp, but perfectly ﬁne if the air molecules in the
room are disturbed a little, or if some bacteria in the room are inadvertently killed. It is cer-
tainly not acceptable to harm pets and humans in the room. We need to make sure that the
robot knows the differences between these cases (and many subtle cases in between) through
a combination of explicit programming, machine learning over time, and rigorous testing.
Utility functions can go wrong due to externalities, the word used by economists for
factors that are outside of what is measured and paid for. The world suffers when green-
house gases are considered as externalities—companies and countries are not penalized for
producing them, and as a result everyone suffers. Ecologist Garrett Hardin (1968) called the
exploitation of shared resources the tragedy of the commons. We can mitigate the tragedy
by internalizing the externalities—making them part of the utility function, for example with
a carbon tax—or by using the design principles that economist Elinor Ostrom identiﬁed as
being used by local people throughout the world for centuries (work that won her the Nobel
Prize in Economics in 2009):
• Clearly deﬁne the shared resource and who has access.
• Adapt to local conditions.
• Allow all parties to participate in decisions.


1054
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
• Monitor the resource with accountable monitors.
• Sanctions, proportional to the severity of the violation.
• Easy conﬂict resolution procedures.
• Hierarchical control for large shared resources.
Victoria Krakovna (2018) has cataloged examples of AI agents that have gamed the system,
ﬁguring out how to maximize utility without actually solving the problem that their designers
intended them to solve. To the designers this looks like cheating, but to the agents, they
are just doing their job. Some agents took advantage of bugs in the simulation (such as
ﬂoating point overﬂow bugs) to propose solutions that would not work once the bug was
ﬁxed. Several agents in video games discovered ways to crash or pause the game when they
were about to lose, thus avoiding a penalty. And in a speciﬁcation where crashing the game
was penalized, one agent learned to use up just enough of the game’s memory so that when it
was the opponent’s turn, it would run out of memory and crash the game. Finally, a genetic
algorithm operating in a simulated world was supposed to evolve fast-moving creatures but
in fact produced creatures that were enormously tall and moved fast by falling over.
Designers of agents should be aware of these kinds of speciﬁcation failures and take steps
to avoid them. To help them do that, Krakovna was part of the team that released the AI Safety
Gridworlds environments (Leike et al., 2017), which allows designers to test how well their
agents perform.
The moral is that we need to be very careful in specifying what we want, because with
utility maximizers we get what we actually asked for. The value alignment problem is the
Value alignment
problem
problem of making sure that what we ask for is what we really want; it is also known as the
King Midas problem, as discussed on page 51. We run into trouble when a utility function
fails to capture background societal norms about acceptable behavior. For example, a human
who is hired to clean ﬂoors, when faced with a messy person who repeatedly tracks in dirt,
knows that it is acceptable to politely ask the person to be more careful, but it is not acceptable
to kidnap or incapacitate said person.
A robotic cleaner needs to know these things too, either through explicit programming or
by learning from observation. Trying to write down all the rules so that the robot always does
the right thing is almost certainly hopeless. We have been trying to write loophole-free tax
laws for several thousand years without success. Better to make the robot want to pay taxes,
so to speak, than to try to make rules to force it to do so when it really wants to do something
else. A sufﬁciently intelligent robot will ﬁnd a way to do something else.
Robots can learn to conform better with human preferences by observing human behav-
ior. This is clearly related to the notion of apprenticeship learning (Section 23.6). The robot
may learn a policy that directly suggests what actions to take in what situations; this is often
a straightforward supervised learning problem if the environment is observable. For exam-
ple, a robot can watch a human playing chess: each state–action pair is an example for the
learning process. Unfortunately, this form of imitation learning means that the robot will
repeat human mistakes. Instead, the robot can apply inverse reinforcement learning to dis-
cover the utility function that the humans must be operating under. Watching even terrible
chess players is probably enough for the robot to learn the objective of the game. Given just
this information, the robot can then go on to exceed human performance—as, for example,
ALPHAZERO did in chess—by computing optimal or near-optimal policies from the objec-


Section 28.3
The Ethics of AI
1055
tive. This approach works not just in board games, but in real-world physical tasks such as
helicopter aerobatics (Coates et al., 2009).
In more complex settings involving, for example, social interactions with humans, it is
very unlikely that the robot will converge to exact and correct knowledge of each human’s
individual preferences. (After all, many humans never quite learn what makes other humans
tick, despite a lifetime of experience, and many of us are unsure of our own preferences too.)
It will be necessary, therefore, for machines to function appropriately when it is uncertain
about human preferences. In Chapter 17, we introduced assistance games, which capture
exactly this situation. Solutions to assistance games include acting cautiously, so as not to
disturb aspects of the world that the human might care about, and asking questions. For
example, the robot could ask whether turning the oceans into sulphuric acid is an acceptable
solution to global warming before it puts the plan into effect.
In dealing with humans, a robot solving an assistance game must accommodate human
imperfections. If the robot asks permission, the human may give it, not foreseeing that the
robot’s proposal is in fact catastrophic in the long term. Moreover, humans do not have
complete introspective access to their true utility function, and they don’t always act in a way
that is compatible with it. Humans sometimes lie or cheat, or do things they know are wrong.
They sometimes take self-destructive actions like overeating or abusing drugs. AI systems
need not learn to adopt these problematic tendencies, but they must understand that they exist
when interpreting human behavior to get at the underlying human preferences.
Despite this toolbox of safeguards, there is a fear, expressed by prominent technologists
such as Bill Gates and Elon Musk and scientists such as Stephen Hawking and Martin Rees,
that AI could evolve out of control. They warn that we have no experience controlling power-
ful nonhuman entities with super-human capabilities. However, that’s not quite true; we have
centuries of experience with nations and corporations; non-human entities that aggregate the
power of thousands or millions of people. Our record of controlling these entities is not very
encouraging: nations produce periodic convulsions called wars that kill tens of millions of
human beings, and corporations are partly responsible for global warming and our inability
to confront it.
AI systems may present much greater problems than nations and corporations because of
their potential to self-improve at a rapid pace, as considered by I. J. Good (1965b):
Let an ultraintelligent machine be deﬁned as a machine that can far surpass all the
Ultraintelligent
machine
intellectual activities of any man however clever. Since the design of machines is one of
these intellectual activities, an ultraintelligent machine could design even better machines;
there would then unquestionably be an “intelligence explosion,” and the intelligence of
man would be left far behind. Thus the ﬁrst ultraintelligent machine is the last invention
that man need ever make, provided that the machine is docile enough to tell us how to
keep it under control.
Good’s “intelligence explosion” has also been called the technological singularity by math-
Technological
singularity
ematics professor and science ﬁction author Vernor Vinge, who wrote in 1993: “Within thirty
years, we will have the technological means to create superhuman intelligence. Shortly after,
the human era will be ended.” In 2017, inventor and futurist Ray Kurzweil predicted the
singularity would appear by 2045, which means it got 2 years closer in 24 years. (At that
rate, only 336 years to go!) Vinge and Kurzweil correctly note that technological progress on
many measures is growing exponentially at present.


