1056
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
It is, however, quite a leap to extrapolate all the way from the rapidly decreasing cost
of computation to a singularity. So far, every technology has followed an S-shaped curve,
where the exponential growth eventually tapers off. Sometimes new technologies step in
when the old ones plateau, but sometimes it is not possible to keep the growth going, for
technical, political, or sociological reasons. For example, the technology of ﬂight advanced
dramatically from the Wright brothers’ ﬂight in 1903 to the moon landing in 1969, but has
had no breakthroughs of comparable magnitude since then.
Another obstacle in the way of ultraintelligent machines taking over the world is the
world. More speciﬁcally, some kinds of progress require not just thinking but acting in the
physical world. (Kevin Kelly calls the overemphasis on pure intelligence thinkism.) An ul-
Thinkism
traintelligent machine tasked with creating a grand uniﬁed theory of physics might be capable
of cleverly manipulating equations a billion times faster than Einstein, but to make any real
progress, it would still need to raise millions of dollars to build a more powerful supercollider
and run physical experiments over the course of months or years. Only then could it start
analyzing the data and theorizing. Depending on how the data turn out, the next step might
require raising additional billions of dollars for an interstellar probe mission that would take
centuries to complete. The “ultraintelligent thinking” part of this whole process might actu-
ally be the least important part. As another example, an ultraintelligent machine tasked with
bringing peace to the Middle East might just end up getting 1000 times more frustrated than
a human envoy. As yet, we don’t know how many of the big problems are like mathematics
and how many are like the Middle East.
While some people fear the singularity, others relish it. The transhumanism social
Transhumanism
movement looks forward to a future in which humans are merged with—or replaced by—
robotic and biotech inventions. Ray Kurzweil writes in The Singularity is Near (2005):
The Singularity will allow us to transcend these limitations of our biological bodies and
brain. We will gain power over our fates. ...We will be able to live as long as we want
...We will fully understand human thinking and will vastly extend and expand its reach.
By the end of this century, the nonbiological portion of our intelligence will be trillions
of trillions of times more powerful than unaided human intelligence.
Similarly, when asked whether robots will inherit the Earth, Marvin Minsky said “yes, but
they will be our children.” These possibilities present a challenge for most moral theorists,
who take the preservation of human life and the human species to be a good thing. Kurzweil
also notes the potential dangers, writing “But the Singularity will also amplify the ability to
act on our destructive inclinations, so its full story has not yet been written.” We humans
would do well to make sure that any intelligent machine we design today that might evolve
into an ultraintelligent machine will do so in a way that ends up treating us well. As Eric
Brynjolfsson puts it, “The future is not preordained by machines. It’s created by humans.”
Summary
This chapter has addressed the following issues:
• Philosophers use the term weak AI for the hypothesis that machines could possibly
behave intelligently, and strong AI for the hypothesis that such machines would count
as having actual minds (as opposed to simulated minds).


Bibliographical and Historical Notes
1057
• Alan Turing rejected the question “Can machines think?” and replaced it with a be-
havioral test. He anticipated many objections to the possibility of thinking machines.
Few AI researchers pay attention to the Turing test, preferring to concentrate on their
systems’ performance on practical tasks, rather than the ability to imitate humans.
• Consciousness remains a mystery.
• AI is a powerful technology, and as such it poses potential dangers, through lethal au-
tonomous weapons, security and privacy breaches, unintended side effects, uninten-
tional errors, and malignant misuse. Those who work with AI technology have an
ethical imperative to responsibly reduce those dangers.
• AI systems must be able to demonstrate they are fair, trustworthy, and transparent.
• There are multiple aspects of fairness, and it is impossible to maximize all of them at
once. So a ﬁrst step is to decide what counts as fair.
• Automation is already changing the way people work. As a society, we will have to
deal with these changes.
Bibliographical and Historical Notes
Weak AI: When Alan Turing (1950) proposed the possibility of AI, he also posed many of
the key philosophical questions, and provided possible replies. But various philosophers had
raised similar issues long before AI was invented. Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s Phenomenology
of Perception (1945) stressed the importance of the body and the subjective interpretation of
reality afforded by our senses, and Martin Heidegger’s Being and Time (1927) asked what it
means to actually be an agent. In the computer age, Alva Noe (2009) and Andy Clark (2015)
propose that our brains form a rather minimal representation of the world, use the world itself
on a just-in-time basis to maintain the illusion of a detailed internal model, and use props
in the world (such as paper and pencil as well as computers) to increase the capabilities of
the mind. Pfeifer et al. (2006) and Lakoff and Johnson (1999) present arguments for how
the body helps shape cognition. Speaking of bodies, Levy (2008), Danaher and McArthur
(2017), and Devlin (2018) address the issue of robot sex.
Strong AI: Ren´e Descartes is known for his dualistic view of the human mind, but ironi-
cally his historical inﬂuence was toward mechanism and physicalism. He explicitly conceived
of animals as automata, and he anticipated the Turing test, writing “it is not conceivable [that
a machine] should produce different arrangements of words so as to give an appropriately
meaningful answer to whatever is said in its presence, as even the dullest of men can do”
(Descartes, 1637). Descartes’s spirited defense of the animals-as-automata viewpoint ac-
tually had the effect of making it easier to conceive of humans as automata as well, even
though he himself did not take this step. The book L’Homme Machine (La Mettrie, 1748)
did explicitly argue that humans are automata. As far back as Homer (circa 700 BCE), the
Greek legends envisioned automata such as the bronze giant Talos and considered the issue
of biotechne, or life through craft (Mayor, 2018).
The Turing test (Turing, 1950) has been debated (Shieber, 2004), anthologized (Epstein
et al., 2008), and criticized (Shieber, 1994; Ford and Hayes, 1995). Bringsjord (2008) gives
advice for a Turing test judge, and Christian (2011) for a human contestant. The annual
Loebner Prize competition is the longest-running Turing test-like contest; Steve Worswick’s


1058
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
MITSUKU won four in a row from 2016 to 2019. The Chinese room has been debated end-
lessly (Searle, 1980; Chalmers, 1992; Preston and Bishop, 2002). Hern´andez-Orallo (2016)
gives an overview of approaches to measuring AI progress, and Chollet (2019) proposes a
measure of intelligence based on skill-acquisition efﬁciency.
Consciousness remains a vexing problem for philosophers, neuroscientists, and anyone
who has pondered their own existence. Block (2009), Churchland (2013) and Dehaene (2014)
provide overviews of the major theories. Crick and Koch (2003) add their expertise in biol-
ogy and neuroscience to the debate, and Gazzaniga (2018) shows what can be learned from
studying brain disabilities in hospital cases. Koch (2019) gives a theory of consciousness—
“intelligence is about doing while experience is about being”—that includes most animals,
but not computers. Giulio Tononi and his colleagues propose integrated information theory
(Oizumi et al., 2014). Damasio (1999) has a theory based on three levels: emotion, feeling,
and feeling a feeling. Bryson (2012) shows the value of conscious attention for the process
of learning action selection.
The philosophical literature on minds, brains, and related topics is large and jargon-ﬁlled.
The Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Edwards, 1967) is an impressively authoritative and very
useful navigation aid. The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy (Audi, 1999) is shorter and
more accessible, and the online Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy offers many excellent
articles and up-to-date references. The MIT Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science (Wilson and
Keil, 1999) covers the philosophy, biology, and psychology of mind. There are multiple intro-
ductions to the philosophical “AI question” (Haugeland, 1985; Boden, 1990; Copeland, 1993;
McCorduck, 2004; Minsky, 2007). The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, abbreviated BBS, is
a major journal devoted to philosophical and scientiﬁc debates about AI and neuroscience.
Science ﬁction writer Isaac Asimov (1942, 1950) was one of the ﬁrst to address the issue
of robot ethics, with his laws of robotics:
0. A robot may not harm humanity, or through inaction, allow humanity to come to harm.
1. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to
come to harm.
2. A robot must obey orders given to it by human beings, except where such orders would
conﬂict with the First Law.
3. A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conﬂict with
the First or Second Law.
At ﬁrst glance, these laws seem reasonable. But the trick is how to implement them. Should
a robot allow a human to cross the street, or eat junk food, if the human might conceivably
come to harm? In Asimov’s story Runaround (1942), humans need to debug a robot that is
found wandering in a circle, acting “drunk.” They work out that the circle deﬁnes the locus of
points that balance the second law (the robot was ordered to fetch some selenium at the center
of the circle) with the third law (there is a danger there that threatens the robot’s existence).4
This suggests that the laws are not logical absolutes, but rather are weighed against each
other, with a higher weight for the earlier laws. As this was 1942, before the emergence of
4
Science ﬁction writers are in broad agreement that robots are very bad at resolving contradictions. In 2001, the
HAL 9000 computer becomes homicidal due to a conﬂict in its orders, and in the Star Trek episode “I, Mudd,”
Captain Kirk tells an enemy robot that “Everything Harry tells you is a lie,” and Harry says “I am lying.” At this,
smoke comes out of the robot’s head and it shuts down.


Bibliographical and Historical Notes
1059
digital computers, Asimov was probably thinking of an architecture based on control theory
via analog computing.
Weld and Etzioni (1994) analyze Asimov’s laws and suggest some ways to modify the
planning techniques of Chapter 11 to generate plans that do no harm. Asimov has considered
many of the ethical issues around technology; in his 1958 story The Feeling of Power he
tackles the issue of automation leading to a lapse of human skill—a technician rediscovers
the lost art of multiplication—as well as the dilemma of what to do when the rediscovery is
applied to warfare.
Norbert Wiener’s book God & Golem, Inc. (1964) correctly predicted that computers
would achieve expert-level performance at games and other tasks, and that specifying what it
is that we want would prove to be difﬁcult. Wiener writes:
While it is always possible to ask for something other than we really want, this
possibility is most serious when the process by which we are to obtain our wish
is indirect, and the degree to which we have obtained our wish is not clear until
the very end. Usually we realize our wishes, insofar as we do actually realize
them, by a feedback process, in which we compare the degree of attainment of
intermediate goals with our anticipation of them. In this process, the feedback
goes through us, and we can turn back before it is too late. If the feedback is
built into a machine that cannot be inspected until the ﬁnal goal is attained, the
possibilities for catastrophe are greatly increased. I should very much hate to ride
on the ﬁrst trial of an automobile regulated by photoelectric feedback devices,
unless there were somewhere a handle by which I could take over control if I
found myself driving smack into a tree.
We summarized codes of ethics in the chapter, but the list of organizations that have is-
sued sets of principles is growing rapidly, and now includes Apple, DeepMind, Facebook,
Google, IBM, Microsoft, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization (UNESCO),
the U.S. Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy the Beijing Academy of Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (BAAI), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the Association
of Computing Machinery (ACM), the World Economic Forum, the Group of Twenty (G20),
OpenAI, the Machine Intelligence Research Institute (MIRI), AI4People, the Centre for the
Study of Existential Risk, the Center for Human-Compatible AI, the Center for Humane Tech-
nology, the Partnership on AI, the AI Now Institute, the Future of Life Institute, the Future
of Humanity Institute, the European Union, and at least 42 national governments. We have
the handbook on the Ethics of Computing (Berleur and Brunnstein, 2001) and introductions
to the topic of AI ethics in book (Boddington, 2017) and survey (Etzioni and Etzioni, 2017a)
form. The Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Law and AI and Society cover ethical issues.
We’ll now look at some of the individual issues.
Lethal autonomous weapons: P. W. Singer’s Wired for War (2009) raised ethical, legal,
and technical issues around robots on the battleﬁeld. Paul Scharre’s Army of None (2018),
written by one of the authors of current US policy on autonomous weapons, offers a balanced
and authoritative view. Etzioni and Etzioni (2017b) address the question of whether artiﬁ-
cial intelligence should be regulated; they recommend a pause in the development of lethal
autonomous weapons, and an international discussion on the subject of regulation.


