CHAPTER 28
PHILOSOPHY, ETHICS, AND SAFETY
OF AI
In which we consider the big questions around the meaning of AI, how we can ethically
develop and apply it, and how we can keep it safe.
Philosophers have been asking big questions for a long time: How do minds work? Is it
possible for machines to act intelligently in the way that people do? Would such machines
have real, conscious minds?
To these, we add new ones: What are the ethical implications of intelligent machines in
day-to-day use? Should machines be allowed to decide to kill humans? Can algorithms be
fair and unbiased? What will humans do if machines can do all kinds of work? And how do
we control machines that may become more intelligent than us?
28.1 The Limits of AI
In 1980, philosopher John Searle introduced a distinction between weak AI—the idea that
Weak AI
machines could act as if they were intelligent—and strong AI—the assertion that machines
Strong AI
that do so are actually consciously thinking (not just simulating thinking). Over time the
deﬁnition of strong AI shifted to refer to what is also called “human-level AI” or “general
AI”—programs that can solve an arbitrarily wide variety of tasks, including novel ones, and
do so as well as a human.
Critics of weak AI who objected to the very possibility of intelligent behavior in machines
now appear as shortsighted as Simon Newcomb, who in October 1903 wrote “aerial ﬂight
is one of the great class of problems with which man can never cope”—just two months
before the Wright brothers’ ﬂight at Kitty Hawk. The rapid progress of recent years does
not, however, prove that there can be no limits to what AI can achieve. Alan Turing (1950),
the ﬁrst person to deﬁne AI, was also the ﬁrst to raise possible objections to AI, foreseeing
almost all the ones subsequently raised by others.
28.1.1 The argument from informality
Turing’s “argument from informality of behavior” says that human behavior is far too com-
plex to be captured by any formal set of rules—humans must be using some informal guide-
lines that (the argument claims) could never be captured in a formal set of rules and thus
could never be codiﬁed in a computer program.
A key proponent of this view was Hubert Dreyfus, who produced a series of inﬂuen-
tial critiques of artiﬁcial intelligence: What Computers Can’t Do (1972), the sequel What


Section 28.1
The Limits of AI
1033
Computers Still Can’t Do (1992), and, with his brother Stuart, Mind Over Machine (1986).
Similarly, philosopher Kenneth Sayre (1993) said “Artiﬁcial intelligence pursued within the
cult of computationalism stands not even a ghost of a chance of producing durable results.”
The technology they criticized came to be called Good Old-Fashioned AI (GOFAI).
Good Old-Fashioned
AI (GOFAI)
GOFAI corresponds to the simplest logical agent design described in Chapter 7, and we
saw there that it is indeed difﬁcult to capture every contingency of appropriate behavior in a
set of necessary and sufﬁcient logical rules; we called that the qualiﬁcation problem. But
as we saw in Chapter 12, probabilistic reasoning systems are more appropriate for open-
ended domains, and as we saw in Chapter 22, deep learning systems do well on a variety
of “informal” tasks. Thus, the critique is not addressed against computers per se, but rather
against one particular style of programming them with logical rules—a style that was popular
in the 1980s but has been eclipsed by new approaches.
One of Dreyfus’s strongest arguments is for situated agents rather than disembodied log-
ical inference engines. An agent whose understanding of “dog” comes only from a limited
set of logical sentences such as “Dog(x) ⇒Mammal(x)” is at a disadvantage compared to an
agent that has watched dogs run, has played fetch with them, and has been licked by one. As
philosopher Andy Clark (1998) says, “Biological brains are ﬁrst and foremost the control sys-
tems for biological bodies. Biological bodies move and act in rich real-world surroundings.”
According to Clark, we are “good at frisbee, bad at logic.”
The embodied cognition approach claims that it makes no sense to consider the brain
Embodied cognition
separately: cognition takes place within a body, which is embedded in an environment. We
need to study the system as a whole; the brain’s functioning exploits regularities in its envi-
ronment, including the rest of its body. Under the embodied cognition approach, robotics,
vision, and other sensors become central, not peripheral.
Overall, Dreyfus saw areas where AI did not have complete answers and said that AI is
therefore impossible; we now see many of these same areas undergoing continued research
and development leading to increased capability, not impossibility.
28.1.2 The argument from disability
The “argument from disability” makes the claim that “a machine can never do X.” As exam-
ples of X, Turing lists the following:
Be kind, resourceful, beautiful, friendly, have initiative, have a sense of humor, tell right
from wrong, make mistakes, fall in love, enjoy strawberries and cream, make someone
fall in love with it, learn from experience, use words properly, be the subject of its own
thought, have as much diversity of behavior as man, do something really new.
In retrospect, some of these are rather easy—we’re all familiar with computers that “make
mistakes.” Computers with metareasoning capabilities (Chapter 6) can examine their own
computations, thus being the subject of their own reasoning. A century-old technology has
the proven ability to “make someone fall in love with it”—the teddy bear. Computer chess
expert David Levy predicts that by 2050 people will routinely fall in love with humanoid
robots. As for a robot falling in love, that is a common theme in ﬁction,1 but there has
been only limited academic speculation on the subject (Kim et al., 2007). Computers have
1
For example, the opera Copp´elia (1870), the novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? (1968), the movies
AI (2001), Wall-E (2008), and Her (2013).


1034
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
done things that are “really new,” making signiﬁcant discoveries in astronomy, mathematics,
chemistry, mineralogy, biology, computer science, and other ﬁelds, and creating new forms of
art through style transfer (Gatys et al., 2016). Overall, programs exceed human performance
in some tasks and lag behind on others. The one thing that it is clear they can’t do is be
exactly human.
28.1.3 The mathematical objection
Turing (1936) and G¨odel (1931) proved that certain mathematical questions are in princi-
ple unanswerable by particular formal systems. G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem (see Sec-
tion 9.5) is the most famous example of this. Brieﬂy, for any formal axiomatic framework F
powerful enough to do arithmetic, it is possible to construct a so-called G¨odel sentence G(F)
with the following properties:
• G(F) is a sentence of F, but cannot be proved within F.
• If F is consistent, then G(F) is true.
Philosophers such as J. R. Lucas (1961) have claimed that this theorem shows that machines
are mentally inferior to humans, because machines are formal systems that are limited by
the incompleteness theorem—they cannot establish the truth of their own G¨odel sentence—
while humans have no such limitation. This has caused a lot of controversy, spawning a
vast literature, including two books by the mathematician/physicist Sir Roger Penrose (1989,
1994). Penrose repeats Lucas’s claim with some fresh twists, such as the hypothesis that
humans are different because their brains operate by quantum gravity—a theory that makes
multiple false predictions about brain physiology.
We will examine three of the problems with Lucas’s claim. First, an agent should not be
ashamed that it cannot establish the truth of some sentence while other agents can. Consider
the following sentence:
Lucas cannot consistently assert that this sentence is true.
If Lucas asserted this sentence, then he would be contradicting himself, so therefore Lucas
cannot consistently assert it, and hence it is true. We have thus demonstrated that there is a
true sentence that Lucas cannot consistently assert while other people (and machines) can.
But that does not make us think any less of Lucas.
Second, G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem and related results apply to mathematics, not
to computers. No entity—human or machine—can prove things that are impossible to prove.
Lucas and Penrose falsely assume that humans can somehow get around these limits, as when
Lucas (1976) says “we must assume our own consistency, if thought is to be possible at all.”
But this is an unwarranted assumption: humans are notoriously inconsistent. This is certainly
true for everyday reasoning, but it is also true for careful mathematical thought. A famous
example is the four-color map problem. Alfred Kempe (1879) published a proof that was
widely accepted for 11 years until Percy Heawood (1890) pointed out a ﬂaw.
Third, G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem technically applies only to formal systems that
are powerful enough to do arithmetic. This includes Turing machines, and Lucas’s claim is
in part based on the assertion that computers are equivalent to Turing machines. This is not
quite true. Turing machines are inﬁnite, whereas computers (and brains) are ﬁnite, and any
computer can therefore be described as a (very large) system in propositional logic, which is
not subject to G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem. Lucas assumes that humans can “change their


Section 28.2
Can Machines Really Think?
1035
minds” while computers cannot, but that is also false—a computer can retract a conclusion
after new evidence or further deliberation; it can upgrade its hardware; and it can change its
decision-making processes with machine learning or software rewriting.
28.1.4 Measuring AI
Alan Turing, in his famous paper “Computing Machinery and Intelligence” (1950), suggested
that instead of asking whether machines can think, we should ask whether machines can pass
a behavioral test, which has come to be called the Turing test. The test requires a program
to have a conversation (via typed messages) with an interrogator for ﬁve minutes. The in-
terrogator then has to guess if the conversation is with a program or a person; the program
passes the test if it fools the interrogator 30% of the time. To Turing, the key point was not
the exact details of the test, but instead the idea of measuring intelligence by performance on
some kind of open-ended behavioral task, rather than by philosophical speculation.
Nevertheless, Turing conjectured that by the year 2000 a computer with a storage of a
billion units could pass the test, but here we are on the other side of 2000, and we still can’t
agree whether any program has passed. Many people have been fooled when they didn’t know
they might be chatting with a computer. The ELIZA program and Internet chatbots such as
MGONZ (Humphrys, 2008) and NATACHATA (Jonathan et al., 2009) fool their correspondents
repeatedly, and the chatbot CYBERLOVER has attracted the attention of law enforcement be-
cause of its penchant for tricking fellow chatters into divulging enough personal information
that their identity can be stolen.
In 2014, a chatbot called Eugene Goostman fooled 33% of the untrained amateur judges
in a Turing test. The program claimed to be a boy from Ukraine with limited command of
English; this helped explain its grammatical errors. Perhaps the Turing test is really a test of
human gullibility. So far no well-trained judge has been fooled (Aaronson, 2014).
Turing test competitions have led to better chatbots, but have not been a focus of research
within the AI community. Instead, AI researchers who crave competition are more likely
to concentrate on playing chess or Go or StarCraft II, or taking an 8th grade science exam,
or identifying objects in images. In many of these competitions, programs have reached
or surpassed human-level performance, but that doesn’t mean the programs are human-like
outside the speciﬁc task. The point is to improve basic science and technology and to provide
useful tools, not to fool judges.
28.2 Can Machines Really Think?
Some philosophers claim that a machine that acts intelligently would not be actually thinking,
but would be only a simulation of thinking. But most AI researchers are not concerned with
the distinction, and the computer scientist Edsger Dijkstra (1984) said that “The question of
whether Machines Can Think . . . is about as relevant as the question of whether Submarines
Can Swim.” The American Heritage Dictionary’s ﬁrst deﬁnition of swim is “To move through
water by means of the limbs, ﬁns, or tail,” and most people agree that submarines, being
limbless, cannot swim. The dictionary also deﬁnes ﬂy as “To move through the air by means
of wings or winglike parts,” and most people agree that airplanes, having winglike parts,
can ﬂy. However, neither the questions nor the answers have any relevance to the design or
capabilities of airplanes and submarines; rather they are about word usage in English. (The


