1040
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
without human involvement are politically unacceptable, morally repugnant and should be
prohibited by international law.”
More than 140 NGOs in over 60 countries are part of the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots,
and an open letter organized in 2015 by the Future of Life Institute organized an open letter
was signed by over 4,000 AI researchers2 and 22,000 others.
Against this, it can be argued that as technology improves it ought to be possible to de-
velop weapons that are less likely than human soldiers or pilots to cause civilian casualties.
(There is also the important beneﬁt that autonomous weapons reduce the need for human sol-
diers and pilots to risk death.) Autonomous systems will not succumb to fatigue, frustration,
hysteria, fear, anger, or revenge, and need not “shoot ﬁrst, ask questions later” (Arkin, 2015).
Just as guided munitions have reduced collateral damage compared to unguided bombs, one
may expect intelligent weapons to further improve the precision of attacks. (Against this, see
Benjamin (2013) for an analysis of drone warfare casualties.) This, apparently, is the position
of the United States in the latest round of negotiations in Geneva.
Perhaps counterintuitively, the United States is also one of the few nations whose own
policies currently preclude the use of autonomous weapons. The 2011 U.S. Department of
Defense (DOD) roadmap says: “For the foreseeable future, decisions over the use of force
[by autonomous systems] and the choice of which individual targets to engage with lethal
force will be retained under human control.” The primary reason for this policy is practical:
autonomous systems are not reliable enough to be trusted with military decisions.
The issue of reliability came to the fore on September 26, 1983, when Soviet missile
ofﬁcer Stanislav Petrov’s computer display ﬂashed an alert of an incoming missile attack.
According to protocol, Petrov should have initiated a nuclear counterattack, but he suspected
the alert was a bug and treated it as such. He was correct, and World War III was (narrowly)
averted. We don’t know what would have happened if there had been no human in the loop.
Reliability is a very serious concern for military commanders, who know well the com-
plexity of battleﬁeld situations. Machine learning systems that operate ﬂawlessly in training
may perform poorly when deployed. Cyberattacks against autonomous weapons could result
in friendly-ﬁre casualties; disconnecting the weapon from all communication may prevent
that (assuming it has not already been compromised), but then the weapon cannot be recalled
if it is malfunctioning.
The overriding practical issue with autonomous weapons is that they they are scalable
weapons of mass destruction, in the sense that the scale of an attack that can be launched is
proportional to the amount of hardware one can afford to deploy. A quadcopter two inches
in diameter can carry a lethal explosive charge, and one million can ﬁt in a regular shipping
container. Precisely because they are autonomous, these weapons would not need one million
human supervisors to do their work.
As weapons of mass destruction, scalable autonomous weapons have advantages for the
attacker compared to nuclear weapons and carpet bombing: they leave property intact and can
be applied selectively to eliminate only those who might threaten an occupying force. They
could certainly be used to wipe out an entire ethnic group or all the adherents of a particular
religion. In many situations, they would also be untraceable. These characteristics make them
particularly attractive to non-state actors.
2
Including the two authors of this book.


Section 28.3
The Ethics of AI
1041
These considerations—particularly those characteristics that advantage the attacker—
suggest that autonomous weapons will reduce global and national security for all parties.
The rational response for governments seems to be to engage in arms control discussions
rather than an arms race.
The process of designing a treaty is not without its difﬁculties, however. AI is a dual
use technology: AI technologies that have peaceful applications such as ﬂight control, vi-
Dual use
sual tracking, mapping, navigation, and multiagent planning, can easily be applied to military
purposes. It is easy to turn an autonomous quadcopter into a weapon simply by attaching
an explosive and commanding it to seek out a target. Dealing with this will require care-
ful implementation of compliance regimes with industry cooperation, as has already been
demonstrated with some success by the Chemical Weapons Convention.
28.3.2 Surveillance, security, and privacy
In 1976, Joseph Weizenbaum warned that automated speech recognition technology could
lead to widespread wiretapping, and hence to a loss of civil liberties. Today, that threat has
been realized, with most electronic communication going through central servers that can
be monitored, and cities packed with microphones and cameras that can identify and track
individuals based on their voice, face, and gait. Surveillance that used to require expensive
and scarce human resources can now be done at a mass scale by machines.
As of 2018, there were as many as 350 million surveillance cameras in China and 70
Surveillance camera
million in the United States. China and other countries have begun exporting surveillance
technology to low-tech countries, some with reputations for mistreating their citizens and
disproportionately targeting marginalized communities. AI engineers should be clear on what
uses of surveillance are compatible with human rights, and decline to work on applications
that are incompatible.
As more of our institutions operate online, we become more vulnerable to cybercrime
(phishing, credit card fraud, botnets, ransomware) and cyberterrorism (including potentially
deadly attacks such as shutting down hospitals and power plants or commandeering self-
driving cars). Machine learning can be a powerful tool for both sides in the cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
battle. Attackers can use automation to probe for insecurities and they can apply reinforce-
ment learning for phishing attempts and automated blackmail. Defenders can use unsuper-
vised learning to detect anomalous incoming trafﬁc patterns (Chandola et al., 2009; Malhotra
et al., 2015) and various machine learning techniques to detect fraud (Fawcett and Provost,
1997; Bolton and Hand, 2002). As attacks get more sophisticated, there is a greater responsi-
bility for all engineers, not just the security experts, to design secure systems from the start.
One forecast (Kanal, 2017) puts the market for machine learning in cybersecurity at about
$100 billion by 2021.
As we interact with computers for increasing amounts of our daily lives, more data on us
is being collected by governments and corporations. Data collectors have a moral and legal
responsibility to be good stewards of the data they hold. In the U.S., the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
Act (FERPA) protect the privacy of medical and student records. The European Union’s
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) mandates that companies design their systems
with protection of data in mind and requires that they obtain user consent for any collection
or processing of data.


1042
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
Balanced against the individual’s right to privacy is the value that society gains from
sharing data. We want to be able to stop terrorists without oppressing peaceful dissent, and
we want to cure diseases without compromising any individual’s right to keep their health
history private. One key practice is de-identiﬁcation: eliminating personally identifying in-
De-identiﬁcation
formation (such as name and social security number) so that medical researchers can use the
data to advance the common good. The problem is that the shared de-identiﬁed data may
be subject to re-identiﬁcation. For example, if the data strips out the name, social security
number, and street address, but includes date of birth, gender, and zip code, then, as shown by
Latanya Sweeney (2000), 87% of the U.S. population can be uniquely re-identiﬁed. Sweeney
emphasized this point by re-identifying the health record for the governor of her state when
he was admitted to the hospital. In the Netﬂix Prize competition, de-identiﬁed records of in-
Netﬂix Prize
dividual movie ratings were released, and competitors were asked to come up with a machine
learning algorithm that could accurately predict which movies an individual would like. But
researchers were able to re-identify individual users by matching the date of a rating in the
Netﬂix database with the date of a similar ranking in the Internet Movie Database (IMDB),
where users sometimes use their actual names (Narayanan and Shmatikov, 2006).
This risk can be mitigated somewhat by generalizing ﬁelds: for example, replacing the
exact birth date with just the year of birth, or a broader range like “20-30 years old.” Deleting
a ﬁeld altogether can be seen as a form of generalizing to “any.” But generalization alone
does not guarantee that records are safe from re-identiﬁcation; it may be that there is only
one person in zip code 94720 who is 90–100 years old. A useful property is k-anonymity:
K-anonymity
a database is k-anonymized if every record in the database is indistinguishable from at least
k −1 other records. If there are records that are more unique than this, they would have to be
further generalized.
An alternative to sharing de-identiﬁed records is to keep all records private, but allow
aggregate querying. An API for queries against the database is provided, and valid queries
Aggregate querying
receive a response that summarizes the data with a count or average. But no response is
given if it would violate certain guarantees of privacy. For example, we could allow an
epidemiologist to ask, for each zip code, the percentage of people with cancer. For zip codes
with at least n people a percentage would be given (with a small amount of random noise),
but no response would be given for zip codes with fewer than n people..
Care must be taken to protect against de-identiﬁcation using multiple queries. For exam-
ple, if the query “average salary and number of employees of XYZ company age 30-40” gives
the response [$81,234, 12] and the query “average salary and number of employees of XYZ
company age 30-41” gives the response [$81,199, 13], and if we use LinkedIn to ﬁnd the one
41-year-old at XYZ company, then we have successfully identiﬁed them, and can compute
their exact salary, even though all the responses involved 12 or more people. The system must
be carefully designed to protect against this, with a combination of limits on the queries that
can be asked (perhaps only a predeﬁned set of non-overlapping age ranges can be queried)
and the precision of the results (perhaps both queries give the answer “about $81,000”).
A stronger guarantee is differential privacy, which assures that an attacker cannot use
Diﬀerential privacy
queries to re-identify any individual in the database, even if the attacker can make multiple
queries and has access to separate linking databases. The query response employs a random-
ized algorithm that adds a small amount of noise to the result. Given a database D, any record
in the database r, any query Q, and a possible response y to the query, we say that the database


Section 28.3
The Ethics of AI
1043
D has ϵ–differential privacy if the log probability of the response y varies by less than ϵ when
we add the record r:
|logP(Q(D)=y)−logP(Q(D+r)=y)| ≤ϵ.
In other words, whether any one person decides to participate in the data base or not makes
no appreciable difference to the answers anyone can get, and therefore there is no privacy
disincentive to participate. Many databases are designed to guarantee differential privacy.
So far we have considered the issue of sharing de-identiﬁed data from a central database.
An approach called federated learning (Koneˇcn`y et al., 2016) has no central database; in-
Federated learning
stead, users maintain their own local databases that keep their data private. However, they
can share parameters of a machine learning model that is enhanced with their data, without
the risk of revealing any of the private data. Imagine a speech understanding application that
users can run locally on their phone. The application contains a baseline neural network,
which is then improved by local training on the words that are heard on the user’s phone.
Periodically, the owners of the application poll a subset of the users and ask them for the
parameter values of their improved local network, but not for any of their raw data. The
parameter values are combined together to form a new improved model which is then made
available to all users, so that they all get the beneﬁt of the training that is done by other users.
For this scheme to preserve privacy, we have to be able to guarantee that the model
parameters shared by each user cannot be reverse-engineered. If we sent the raw parameters,
there is a chance that an adversary inspecting them could deduce whether, say, a certain word
had been heard by the user’s phone. One way to eliminate this risk is with secure aggregation
Secure aggregation
(Bonawitz et al., 2017). The idea is that the central server doesn’t need to know the exact
parameter value from each distributed user; it only needs to know the average value for each
parameter, over all polled users. So each user can disguise their parameter values by adding
a unique mask to each value; as long as the sum of the masks is zero, the central server will
be able to compute the correct average. Details of the protocol make sure that it is efﬁcient
in terms of communication (less than half the bits transmitted correspond to masking), is
robust to individual users failing to respond, and is secure in the face of adversarial users,
eavesdroppers, or even an adversarial central server.
28.3.3 Fairness and bias
Machine learning is augmenting and sometimes replacing human decision-making in im-
portant situations: whose loan gets approved, to what neighborhoods police ofﬁcers are de-
ployed, who gets pretrial release or parole. But machine learning models can perpetuate
societal bias. Consider the example of an algorithm to predict whether criminal defendants
Societal bias
are likely to re-offend, and thus whether they should be released before trial. It could well be
that such a system picks up the racial or gender prejudices of human judges from the exam-
ples in the training set. Designers of machine learning systems have a moral responsibility to
ensure that their systems are in fact fair. In regulated domains such as credit, education, em-
ployment, and housing, they have a legal responsibility as well. But what is fairness? There
are multiple criteria; here are six of the most commonly-used concepts:
• Individual fairness: A requirement that individuals are treated similarly to other simi-
lar individuals, regardless of what class they are in.


