1044
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
• Group fairness: A requirement that two classes are treated similarly, as measured by
some summary statistic.
• Fairness through unawareness: If we delete the race and gender attributes from the
data set, then it might seem that the system cannot discriminate on those attributes.
Unfortunately, we know that machine learning models can predict latent variables (such
as race and gender) given other correlated variables (such as zip code and occupation).
Furthermore, deleting those attributes makes it impossible to verify equal opportunity
or equal outcomes. Still, some countries (e.g., Germany) have chosen this approach for
their demographic statistics (whether or not machine learning models are involved).
• Equal outcome: The idea that each demographic class gets the same results; they have
demographic parity. For example, suppose we have to decide whether we should
Demographic parity
approve loan applications; the goal is to approve those applicants who will pay back
the loan and not those who will default on the loan. Demographic parity says that
both males and females should have the same percentage of loans approved. Note that
this is a group fairness criterion that does nothing to ensure individual fairness; a well-
qualiﬁed applicant might be denied and a poorly-qualiﬁed applicant might be approved,
as long as the overall percentages are equal. Also, this approach favors redress of past
biases over accuracy of prediction. If a man and a woman are equal in every way, except
the woman receives a lower salary for the same job, should she be approved because she
would be equal if not for historical biases, or should she be denied because the lower
salary does in fact make her more likely to default?
• Equal opportunity: The idea that the people who truly have the ability to pay back
the loan should have an equal chance of being correctly classiﬁed as such, regardless of
their sex. This approach is also called “balance.” It can lead to unequal outcomes and
ignores the effect of bias in the societal processes that produced the training data.
• Equal impact: People with similar likelihood to pay back the loan should have the
same expected utility, regardless of the class they belong to. This goes beyond equal
opportunity in that it considers both the beneﬁts of a true prediction and the costs of a
false prediction.
Let us examine how these issues play out in a particular context. COMPAS is a com-
mercial system for recidivism (re-offense) scoring. It assigns to a defendant in a criminal
case a risk score, which is then used by a judge to help make decisions: Is it safe to release
the defendant before trial, or should they be held in jail? If convicted, how long should the
sentence be? Should parole be granted? Given the signiﬁcance of these decisions, the system
has been the subject of intense scrutiny (Dressel and Farid, 2018).
COMPAS is designed to be well calibrated: all the individuals who are given the same
Well calibrated
score by the algorithm should have approximately the same probability of re-offending, re-
gardless of race. For example, among all people that the model assigns a risk score of 7 out
of 10, 60% of whites and 61% of blacks re-offend. The designers thus claim that it meets the
desired fairness goal.
On the other hand, COMPAS does not achieve equal opportunity: the proportion of
those who did not re-offend but were falsely rated as high-risk was 45% for blacks and 23%
for whites. In the case State v. Loomis, where a judge relied on COMPAS to determine the
sentence of the defendant, Loomis argued that the secretive inner workings of the algorithm


Section 28.3
The Ethics of AI
1045
violated his due process rights. Though the Wisconsin Supreme Court found that the sentence
given would be no different without COMPAS in this case, it did issue warnings about the
algorithm’s accuracy and risks to minority defendants. Other researchers have questioned
whether it is appropriate to use algorithms in applications such as sentencing.
We could hope for an algorithm that is both well calibrated and equal opportunity, but,
as Kleinberg et al. (2016) show, that is impossible. If the base classes are different, then
any algorithm that is well calibrated will necessarily not provide equal opportunity, and vice
versa. How can we weigh the two criteria? Equal impact is one possibility. In the case of
COMPAS, this means weighing the negative utility of defendants being falsely classiﬁed as
high risk and losing their freedom, versus the cost to society of an additional crime being
committed, and ﬁnding the point that optimizes the tradeoff. This is complicated because
there are multiple costs to consider. There are individual costs—a defendant who is wrong-
fully held in jail suffers a loss, as does the victim of a defendant who was wrongfully released
and re-offends. But beyond that there are group costs—everyone has a certain fear that they
will be wrongfully jailed, or will be the victim of a crime, and all taxpayers contribute to the
costs of jails and courts. If we give value to those fears and costs in proportion to the size of
a group, then utility for the majority may come at the expense of a minority.
Another problem with the whole idea of recidivism scoring, regardless of the model used,
is that we don’t have unbiased ground truth data. The data does not tell us who has committed
a crime—all we know is who has been convicted of a crime. If the arresting ofﬁcers, judge,
or jury is biased, then the data will be biased. If more ofﬁcers patrol some locations, then
the data will be biased against people in those locations. Only defendants who are released
are candidates to recommit, so if the judges making the release decisions are biased, the data
may be biased. If you assume that behind the biased data set there is an underlying, unknown,
unbiased data set which has been corrupted by an agent with biases, then there are techniques
to recover an approximation to the unbiased data. Jiang and Nachum (2019) describe various
scenarios and the techniques involved.
One more risk is that machine learning can be used to justify bias. If decisions are made
by a biased human after consulting with a machine learning system, the human can say “here
is how my interpretation of the model supports my decision, so you shouldn’t question my
decision.” But other interpretations could lead to an opposite decision.
Sometimes fairness means that we should reconsider the objective function, not the data
or the algorithm. For example, in making job hiring decisions, if the objective is to hire
candidates with the best qualiﬁcations in hand, we risk unfairly rewarding those who have
had advantageous educational opportunities throughout their lives, thereby enforcing class
boundaries. But if the objective is to hire candidates with the best ability to learn on the job,
we have a better chance to cut across class boundaries and choose from a broader pool. Many
companies have programs designed for such applicants, and ﬁnd that after a year of training,
the employees hired this way do as well as the traditional candidates. Similarly, just 18% of
computer science graduates in the U.S. are women, but some schools, such as Harvey Mudd
University, have achieved 50% parity with an approach that is focused on encouraging and
retaining those who start the computer science program, especially those who start with less
programming experience.
A ﬁnal complication is deciding which classes deserve protection. In the U.S., the Fair
Housing Act recognized seven protected classes: race, color, religion, national origin, sex,


1046
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
disability, and familial status. Other local, state, and federal laws recognize other classes,
including sexual orientation, and pregnancy, marital, and veteran status. Is it fair that these
classes count for some laws and not others? International human rights law, which encom-
passes a broad set of protected classes, is a potential framework to harmonize protections
across various groups.
Even in the absence of societal bias, sample size disparity can lead to biased results.
Sample size disparity
In most data sets there will be fewer training examples of minority class individuals than
of majority class individuals. Machine learning algorithms give better accuracy with more
training data, so that means that members of minority classes will experience lower accuracy.
For example, Buolamwini and Gebru (2018) examined a computer vision gender identiﬁca-
tion service, and found that it had near-perfect accuracy for light-skinned males, and a 33%
error rate for dark-skinned females. A constrained model may not be able to simultaneously
ﬁt both the majority and minority class—a linear regression model might minimize average
error by ﬁtting just the majority class, and in an SVM model, the support vectors might all
correspond to majority class members.
Bias can also come into play in the software development process (whether or not the
software involves machine learning). Engineers who are debugging a system are more likely
to notice and ﬁx those problems that are applicable to themselves. For example, it is difﬁcult
to notice that a user interface design won’t work for colorblind people unless you are in fact
colorblind, or that an Urdu language translation is faulty if you don’t speak Urdu.
How can we defend against these biases? First, understand the limits of the data you are
using. It has been suggested that data sets (Gebru et al., 2018; Hind et al., 2018) and models
(Mitchell et al., 2019) should come with annotations: declarations of provenance, security,
conformity, and ﬁtness for use. This is similar to the data sheets that accompany electronic
Data sheet
components such as resistors; they allow designers to decide what components to use. In
addition to the data sheets, it is important to train engineers to be aware of issues of fairness
and bias, both in school and with on-the-job training. Having a diversity of engineers from
different backgrounds makes it easier for them to notice problems in the data or models. A
study by the AI Now Institute (West et al., 2019) found that only 18% of authors at leading
AI conferences and 20% of AI professors are women. Black AI workers are at less than 4%.
Rates at industry research labs are similar. Diversity could be increased by programs earlier
in the pipeline—in college or high school—and by greater awareness at the professional level.
Joy Buolamwini founded the Algorithmic Justice League to raise awareness of this issue and
develop practices for accountability.
A second idea is to de-bias the data (Zemel et al., 2013). We could over-sample from
minority classes to defend against sample size disparity. Techniques such as SMOTE, the
synthetic minority over-sampling technique (Chawla et al., 2002) or ADASYN, the adaptive
synthetic sampling approach for imbalanced learning (He et al., 2008), provide principled
ways of oversampling. We could examine the provenance of data and, for example, eliminate
examples from judges who have exhibited bias in their past court cases. Some analysts object
to the idea of discarding data, and instead would recommend building a hierarchical model of
the data that includes sources of bias, so they can be modeled and compensated for. Google
and NeurIPS have attempted to raise awareness of this issue by sponsoring the Inclusive
Images Competition, in which competitors train a network on a data set of labeled images
collected in North America and Europe, and then test it on images taken from all around the


Section 28.3
The Ethics of AI
1047
world. The issue is that given this data set, it is easy to apply the label “bride” to a woman
in a standard Western wedding dress, but harder to recognize traditional African and Indian
matrimonial dress.
A third idea is to invent new machine learning models and algorithms that are more resis-
tant to bias; and the ﬁnal idea is to let a system make initial recommendations that may be bi-
ased, but then train a second system to de-bias the recommendations of the ﬁrst one. Bellamy
et al. (2018) introduced the IBM AI FAIRNESS 360 system, which provides a framework for
all of these ideas. We expect there will be increased use of tools like this in the future.
How do you make sure that the systems you build will be fair? A set of best practices has
been emerging (although they are not always followed):
• Make sure that the software engineers talk with social scientists and domain experts to
understand the issues and perspectives, and consider fairness from the start.
• Create an environment that fosters the development of a diverse pool of software engi-
neers that are representative of society.
• Deﬁne what groups your system will support: different language speakers, different age
groups, different abilities with sight and hearing, etc.
• Optimize for an objective function that incorporates fairness.
• Examine your data for prejudice and for correlations between protected attributes and
other attributes.
• Understand how any human annotation of data is done, design goals for annotation
accuracy, and verify that the goals are met.
• Don’t just track overall metrics for your system; make sure you track metrics for sub-
groups that might be victims of bias.
• Include system tests that reﬂect the experience of minority group users.
• Have a feedback loop so that when fairness problems come up, they are dealt with.
28.3.4 Trust and transparency
It is one challenge to make an AI system accurate, fair, safe, and secure; a different chal-
lenge to convince everyone else that you have done so. People need to be able to trust the
Trust
systems they use. A PwC survey in 2017 found that 76% of businesses were slowing the
adoption of AI because of trustworthiness concerns. In Section 19.9.4 we covered some of
the engineering approaches to trust; here we discuss the policy issues.
To earn trust, any engineered systems must go through a veriﬁcation and validation
Veriﬁcation and
validation
(V&V) process. Veriﬁcation means that the product satisﬁes the speciﬁcations. Validation
means ensuring that the speciﬁcations actually meet the needs of the user and other affected
parties. We have an elaborate V&V methodology for engineering in general, and for tradi-
tional software development done by human coders; much of that is applicable to AI systems.
But machine learning systems are different and demand a different V&V process, which has
not yet been fully developed. We need to verify the data that these systems learn from; we
need to verify the accuracy and fairness of the results, even in the face of uncertainty that
makes an exact result unknowable; and we need to verify that adversaries cannot unduly
inﬂuence the model, nor steal information by querying the resulting model.
One instrument of trust is certiﬁcation; for example, Underwriters Laboratories (UL)
Certiﬁcation
was founded in 1894 at a time when consumers were apprehensive about the risks of electric


