1060
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
Privacy: Latanya Sweeney (Sweeney, 2002b) presents the k-anonymity model and the
idea of generalizing ﬁelds (Sweeney, 2002a). Achieving k-anonymity with minimal loss of
data is an NP-hard problem, but Bayardo and Agrawal (2005) give an approximation algo-
rithm. Cynthia Dwork (2008) describes differential privacy, and in subsequent work gives
practical examples of clever ways to apply differential privacy to get better results than the
naive approach (Dwork et al., 2014). Guo et al. (2019) describe a process for certiﬁed data
removal: if you train a model on some data, and then there is a request to delete some of the
data, this extension of differential privacy lets you modify the model and prove that it does
not make use of the deleted data. Ji et al. (2014) gives a review of the ﬁeld of privacy. Etzioni
(2004) argues for a balancing of privacy and security; individual rights and community. Fung
et al. (2018), Bagdasaryan et al. (2018) discuss the various attacks on federated learning pro-
tocols. Narayanan et al. (2011) describe how they were able to de-anonymize the obfuscated
connection graph from the 2011 Social Network Challenge by crawling the site where the
data was obtained (Flickr), and matching nodes with unusually high in-degree or out-degree
between the provided data and the crawled data. This allowed them to gain additional infor-
mation to win the challenge, and it also allowed them to uncover the true identity of nodes
in the data. Tools for user privacy are becoming available; for example, TensorFlow provides
modules for federated learning and privacy (McMahan and Andrew, 2018).
Fairness: Cathy O’Neil’s book Weapons of Math Destruction (2017) describes how var-
ious black box machine learning models inﬂuence our lives, often in unfair ways. She calls
on model builders to take responsibility for fairness, and for policy makers to impose appro-
priate regulation. Dwork et al. (2012) showed the ﬂaws with the simplistic “fairness through
unawareness” approach. Bellamy et al. (2018) present a toolkit for mitigating bias in machine
learning systems. Tram`er et al. (2016) show how an adversary can “steal” a machine learning
model by making queries against an API, Hardt et al. (2017) describe equal opportunity as
a metric for fairness. Chouldechova and Roth (2018) give an overview of the frontiers of
fairness, and Verma and Rubin (2018) give an exhaustive survey of fairness deﬁnitions.
Kleinberg et al. (2016) show that, in general, an algorithm cannot be both well-calibrated
and equal opportunity. Berk et al. (2017) give some additional deﬁnitions of types of fairness,
and again conclude that it is impossible to satisfy all aspects at once. Beutel et al. (2019) give
advice for how to put fairness metrics into practice.
Dressel and Farid (2018) report on the COMPAS recidivism scoring model. Christin
et al. (2015) and Eckhouse et al. (2019) discuss the use of predictive algorithms in the le-
gal system. Corbett-Davies et al. (2017) show that that there is a tension between ensuring
fairness and optimizing public safety, and Corbett-Davies and Goel (2018) discuss the dif-
ferences between fairness frameworks. Chouldechova (2017) advocates for fair impact: all
classes should have the same expected utility. Liu et al. (2018a) advocate for a long-term
measure of impact, pointing out that, for example, if we change the decision point for ap-
proving a loan in order to be more fair in the short run, this could have negative effect in the
long run on people who end up defaulting on a loan and thus have their credit score reduced.
Since 2014 there has been an annual conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency in Machine Learning. Mehrabi et al. (2019) give a comprehensive survey of bias and
fairness in machine learning, cataloging 23 kinds of bias and 10 deﬁnitions of fairness.
Trust: Explainable AI was an important topic going back to the early days of expert
systems (Neches et al., 1985), and has been making a resurgence in recent years (Biran and


Bibliographical and Historical Notes
1061
Cotton, 2017; Miller et al., 2017; Kim, 2018). Barreno et al. (2010) give a taxonomy of
the types of security attacks that can be made against a machine learning system, and Tygar
(2011) surveys adversarial machine learning. Researchers at IBM have a proposal for gaining
trust in AI systems through declarations of conformity (Hind et al., 2018). DARPA requires
explainable decisions for its battleﬁeld systems, and has issued a call for research in the area
(Gunning, 2016).
AI safety: The book Artiﬁcial Intelligence Safety and Security (Yampolskiy, 2018) col-
lects essays on AI safety, both recent and classic, going back to Bill Joy’s Why the Future
Doesn’t Need Us (Joy, 2000). The “King Midas problem” was anticipated by Marvin Minsky,
who once suggested that an AI program designed to solve the Riemann Hypothesis might end
up taking over all the resources of Earth to build more powerful supercomputers. Similarly,
Omohundro (2008) foresees a chess program that hijacks resources, and Bostrom (2014) de-
scribes the runaway paper clip factory that takes over the world. Yudkowsky (2008) goes into
more detail about how to design a Friendly AI. Amodei et al. (2016) present ﬁve practical
safety problems for AI systems.
Omohundro (2008) describes the Basic AI Drives and concludes, “Social structures which
cause individuals to bear the cost of their negative externalities would go a long way toward
ensuring a stable and positive future.” Elinor Ostrom’s Governing the Commons (1990) de-
scribes practices for dealing with externalities by traditional cultures. Ostrom has also applied
this approach to the idea of knowledge as a commons (Hess and Ostrom, 2007).
Ray Kurzweil (2005) proclaimed The Singularity is Near, and a decade later Murray
Shanahan (2015) gave an update on the topic. Microsoft cofounder Paul Allen countered
with The Singularity isn’t Near (2011). He didn’t dispute the possibility of ultraintelligent
machines; he just thought it would take more than a century to get there. Rod Brooks is a
frequent critic of singularitarianism; he points out that technologies often take longer than
predicted to mature, that we are prone to magical thinking, and that exponentials don’t last
forever (Brooks, 2017).
On the other hand, for every optimistic singularitarian there is a pessimist who fears
new technology. The Web site pessimists.co shows that this has been true throughout
history: for example, in the 1890s people were concerned that the elevator would inevitably
cause nausea, that the telegraph would lead to loss of privacy and moral corruption, that the
subway would release dangerous underground air and disturb the dead, and that the bicycle—
especially the idea of a woman riding one—was the work of the devil.
Hans Moravec (2000) introduces some of the ideas of transhumanism, and Bostrom
(2005) gives an updated history. Good’s ultraintelligent machine idea was foreseen a hun-
dred years earlier in Samuel Butler’s Darwin Among the Machines (1863). Written four
years after the publication of Charles Darwin’s On the Origins of Species and at a time when
the most sophisticated machines were steam engines, Butler’s article envisioned “the ultimate
development of mechanical consciousness” by natural selection. The theme was reiterated by
George Dyson (1998) in a book of the same title, and was referenced by Alan Turing, who
wrote in 1951 “At some stage therefore we should have to expect the machines to take control
in the way that is mentioned in Samuel Butler’s Erewhon” (Turing, 1996).
Robot rights: A book edited by Yorick Wilks (2010) gives different perspectives on how
we should deal with artiﬁcial companions, ranging from Joanna Bryson’s view that robots
should serve us as tools, not as citizens, to Sherry Turkle’s observation that we already per-


1062
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
sonify our computers and other tools, and are quite willing to blur the boundaries between
machines and life. Wilks also contributed a recent update on his views (Wilks, 2019). The
philosopher David Gunkel’s book Robot Rights (2018) considers four possibilities: can robots
have rights or not, and should they or not? The American Society for the Prevention of Cru-
elty to Robots (ASPCR) proclaims that “The ASPCR is, and will continue to be, exactly as
serious as robots are sentient.”
The future of work: In 1888, Edward Bellamy published the best-seller Looking Back-
ward, which predicted that by the year 2000, technological advances would led to a utopia
where equality is achieved and people work short hours and retire early. Soon after, E. M.
Forster took the dystopian view in The Machine Stops (1909), in which a benevolent machine
takes over the running of a society; things fall apart when the machine inevitably fails. Nor-
bert Wiener’s prescient book The Human Use of Human Beings (1950) argues for the beneﬁts
of automation in freeing people from drudgery while offering more creative work, but also
discusses several dangers that we recognize as problems today, particularly the problem of
value alignment.
The book Disrupting Unemployment (Nordfors et al., 2018) discuss some of the ways
that work is changing, opening opportunities for new careers. Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew
McAfee address these themes and more in their books Race Against the Machine (2011) and
The Second Machine Age (2014). Ford (2015) describes the challenges of increasing au-
tomation, and West (2018) provides recommendations to mitigate the problems, while MIT’s
Thomas Malone (2004) shows that many of the same issues were apparent a decade earlier,
but at that time were attributed to worldwide communication networks, not to automation.


