1048
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
power. UL certiﬁcation of appliances gave consumers increased trust, and in fact UL is now
considering entering the business of product testing and certiﬁcation for AI.
Other industries have long had safety standards. For example, ISO 26262 is an interna-
tional standard for the safety of automobiles, describing how to develop, produce, operate,
and service vehicles in a safe way. The AI industry is not yet at this level of clarity, although
there are some frameworks in progress, such as IEEE P7001, a standard deﬁning ethical de-
sign for artiﬁcial intelligence and autonomous systems (Bryson and Winﬁeld, 2017). There is
ongoing debate about what kind of certiﬁcation is necessary, and to what extent it should be
done by the government, by professional organizations like IEEE, by independent certiﬁers
such as UL, or through self-regulation by the product companies.
Another aspect of trust is transparency: consumers want to know what is going on
Transparency
inside a system, and that the system is not working against them, whether due to intentional
malice, an unintentional bug, or pervasive societal bias that is recapitulated by the system. In
some cases this transparency is delivered directly to the consumer. In other cases their are
intellectual property issues that keep some aspects of the system hidden to consumers, but
open to regulators and certiﬁcation agencies.
When an AI system turns you down for a loan, you deserve an explanation. In Europe,
the GDPR enforces this for you. An AI system that can explain itself is called explainable AI
(XAI). A good explanation has several properties: it should be understandable and convincing
Explainable AI (XAI)
to the user, it should accurately reﬂect the reasoning of the system, it should be complete, and
it should be speciﬁc in that different users with different conditions or different outcomes
should get different explanations.
It is quite easy to give a decision algorithm access to its own deliberative processes,
simply by recording them and making them available as data structures. This means that
machines may eventually be able to give better explanations of their decisions than humans
can. Moreover, we can take steps to certify that the machine’s explanations are not deceptions
(intentional or self-deception), something that is more difﬁcult with a human.
An explanation is a helpful but not sufﬁcient ingredient to trust. One issue is that expla-
nations are not decisions: they are stories about decisions. As discussed in Section 19.9.4, we
say that a system is interpretable if we can inspect the source code of the model and see what
it is doing, and we say it is explainable if we can make up a story about what it is doing—even
if the system itself is an uninterpretable black box. To explain an uninterpretable black box,
we need to build, debug, and test a separate explanation system, and make sure it is in sync
with the original system. And because humans love a good story, we are all too willing to be
swayed by an explanation that sounds good. Take any political controversy of the day, and
you can always ﬁnd two so-called experts with diametrically opposed explanations, both of
which are internally consistent.
A ﬁnal issue is that an explanation about one case does not give you a summary over
other cases. If the bank explains, “Sorry, you didn’t get the loan because you have a history
of previous ﬁnancial problems,” you don’t know if that explanation is accurate or if the bank is
secretly biased against you for some reason. In this case, you require not just an explanation,
but also an audit of past decisions, with aggregated statistics across various demographic
groups, to see if their approval rates are balanced.
Part of transparency is knowing whether you are interacting with an AI system or a hu-
man. Toby Walsh (2015) proposed that “an autonomous system should be designed so that


Section 28.3
The Ethics of AI
1049
it is unlikely to be mistaken for anything besides an autonomous system, and should identify
itself at the start of any interaction.” He called this the “red ﬂag” law, in honor of the UK’s
1865 Locomotive Act, which required any motorized vehicle to have a person with a red ﬂag
walk in front of it, to signal the oncoming danger.
In 2019, California enacted a law stating that “It shall be unlawful for any person to use
a bot to communicate or interact with another person in California online, with the intent to
mislead the other person about its artiﬁcial identity.”
28.3.5 The future of work
From the ﬁrst agricultural revolution (10,000 BCE) to the industrial revolution (late 18th
century) to the green revolution in food production (1950s), new technologies have changed
the way humanity works and lives. A primary concern arising from the advance of AI is that
human labor will become obsolete. Aristotle, in Book I of his Politics, presents the main
point quite clearly:
For if every instrument could accomplish its own work, obeying or anticipating the will
of others . . .if, in like manner, the shuttle would weave and the plectrum touch the lyre
without a hand to guide them, chief workmen would not want servants, nor masters slaves.
Everyone agrees with Aristotle’s observation that there is an immediate reduction in employ-
ment when an employer ﬁnds a mechanical method to perform work previously done by a
person. The issue is whether the so-called compensation effects that ensue—and that tend to
increase employment—will eventually make up for this reduction. The primary compensa-
tion effect is the increase in overall wealth from greater productivity, which leads in turn to
greater demand for goods and tends to increase employment. For example, PwC (Rao and
Verweij, 2017) predicts that AI contribute $15 trillion annually to global GDP by 2030. The
healthcare and automotive/transportation industries stand to gain the most in the short term.
However, the advantages of automation have not yet taken over in our economy: the current
rate of growth in labor productivity is actually below historical standards. Brynjolfsson et al.
(2018) attempt to explain this paradox by suggesting that the lag between the development of
basic technology and its implementation in the economy is longer than commonly supposed.
Technological innovations have historically put some people out of work. Weavers were
replaced by automated looms in the 1810s, leading to the Luddite protests. The Luddites were
not against technology per se; they just wanted the machines to be used by skilled workers
paid a good wage to make high-quality goods, rather than by unskilled workers to make poor-
quality goods at low wages. The global destruction of jobs in the 1930s led John Maynard
Keynes to coin the term technological unemployment. In both cases, and several others,
Technological
unemployment
employment levels eventally recovered.
The mainstream economic view for most of the 20th century was that technological em-
ployment was at most a short-term phenomenon. Increased productivity would always lead
to increased wealth and increased demand, and thus net job growth. A commonly cited ex-
ample is that of bank tellers: although ATMs replaced humans in the job of counting out cash
for withdrawals, that made it cheaper to operate a bank branch, so the number of branches
increased, leading to more bank employees overall. The nature of the work also changed, be-
coming less routine and requiring more advanced business skills. The net effect of automation
seems to be in eliminating tasks rather than jobs.


1050
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
The majority of commenters predict that the same will hold true with AI technology, at
least in the short run. Gartner, McKinsey, Forbes, the World Economic Forum, and the Pew
Research Center each released reports in 2018 predicting a net increase in jobs due to AI-
driven automation. But some analysts think that this time around, things will be different. In
2019, IBM predicted that 120 million workers would need retraining due to automation by
2022, and Oxford Economics predicted that 20 million manufacturing jobs could be lost to
automation by 2030.
Frey and Osborne (2017) survey 702 different occupations, and estimate that 47% of them
are at risk of being automated, meaning that at least some of the tasks in the occupation can
be performed by machine. For example, almost 3% of the workforce in the U.S. are vehicle
drivers, and in some districts, as much as 15% of the male workforce are drivers. As we saw in
Chapter 26, the task of driving is likely to be eliminated by driverless cars/trucks/buses/taxis.
It is important to distinguish between occupations and the tasks within those occupations.
McKinsey estimates that only 5% of occupations are fully automatable, but that 60% of oc-
cupations can have about 30% of their tasks automated. For example, future truck drivers
will spend less time holding the steering wheel and more time making sure that the goods
are picked up and delivered properly; serving as customer service representatives and sales-
people at either end of the journey; and perhaps managing convoys of, say, three robotic
trucks. Replacing three drivers with one convoy manager implies a net loss in employment,
but if transportation costs decrease, there will be more demand, which wins some of the
jobs back—but perhaps not all of them. As another example, despite many advances in ap-
plying machine learning to the problem of medical imaging, radiologists have so far been
augmented, not replaced, by these tools. Ultimately, there is a choice of how to make use of
automation: do we want to focus on cutting cost, and thus see job loss as a positive; or do we
want to focus on improving quality, making life better for the worker and the customer?
It is difﬁcult to predict exact timelines for automation, but currently, and for the next
few years, the emphasis is on automation of structured analytical tasks, such as reading x-ray
images, customer relationship management (e.g., bots that automatically sort customer com-
plaints and respond with suggested remedies), and business process automation that com-
Business process
automation
bines text documents and structured data to make business decisions and improve workﬂow.
Over time, we will see more automation with physical robots, ﬁrst in controlled warehouse
environments, then in more uncertain environments, building to a signiﬁcant portion of the
marketplace by around 2030.
As populations in developed countries grow older, the ratio between workers and retirees
changes. In 2015 there were less than 30 retirees per 100 workers; by 2050 there may be
over 60 per 100 workers. Care for the elderly will be an increasingly important role, one that
can partially be ﬁlled by AI. Moreover, if we want to maintain the current standard of living,
it will also be necessary to make the remaining workers more productive; automation seems
like the best opportunity to do that.
Even if automation has a multi-trillion-dollar net positive impact, there may still be prob-
lems due to the pace of change. Consider how change came to the farming industry: in 1900,
Pace of change
over 40% of the U.S. workforce was in agriculture, but by 2000 that had fallen to 2%.3 That
3
In 2010, although only 2% of the U.S. workforce were actual farmers, over 25% of the population (80 million
people) played the FARMVILLE game at least once.


Section 28.3
The Ethics of AI
1051
is a huge disruption in the way we work, but it happened over a period of 100 years, and thus
across generations, not in the lifetime of one worker.
Workers whose jobs are automated away this decade may have to retrain for a new pro-
fession within a few years—and then perhaps see their new profession automated and face
yet another retraining period. Some may be happy to leave their old profession—we see that
as the economy improves, trucking companies need to offer new incentives to hire enough
drivers—but workers will be apprehensive about their new roles. To handle this, we as a soci-
ety need to provide lifelong education, perhaps relying in part on online education driven by
artiﬁcial intelligence (Martin, 2012). Bessen (2015) argues that workers will not see increases
in income until they are trained to implement the new technologies, a process that takes time.
Technology tends to magnify income inequality. In an information economy marked
Income inequality
by high-bandwidth global communication and zero-marginal-cost replication of intellectual
property (what Frank and Cook (1996) call the “Winner-Take-All Society”), rewards tend to
be concentrated. If farmer Ali is 10% better than farmer Bo, then Ali gets about 10% more
income: Ali can charge slightly more for superior goods, but there is a limit on how much
can be produced on the land, and how far it can be shipped. But if software app developer
Cary is 10% better than Dana, it may be that Cary ends up with 99% of the global market. AI
increases the pace of technological innovation and thus contributes to this overall trend, but
AI also holds the promise of allowing us to take some time off and let our automated agents
handle things for a while. Tim Ferriss (2007) recommends using automation and outsourcing
to achieve a four-hour work week.
Before the industrial revolution, people worked as farmers or in other crafts, but didn’t
report to a job at a place of work and put in hours for an employer. But today, most adults
in developed countries do just that, and the job serves three purposes: it fuels the production
of the goods that society needs to ﬂourish, it provides the income that the worker needs to
live, and it gives the worker a sense of purpose, accomplishment, and social integration. With
increasing automation, it may be that these three purposes become disaggregated—society’s
needs will be served in part by automation, and in the long run, individuals will get their
sense of purpose from contributions other than work. Their income needs can be served by
social policies that include a combination of free or inexpensive access to social services and
education, portable health care, retirement, and education accounts, progressive tax rates,
earned income tax credits, negative income tax, or universal basic income.
28.3.6 Robot rights
The question of robot consciousness, discussed in Section 28.2, is critical to the question of
what rights, if any, robots should have. If they have no consciousness, no qualia, then few
would argue that they deserve rights.
But if robots can feel pain, if they can dread death, if they are considered “persons,” then
the argument can be made (e.g., by Sparrow (2004)) that they have rights and deserve to have
their rights recognized, just as slaves, women, and other historically oppressed groups have
fought to have their rights recognized. The issue of robot personhood is often considered in
ﬁction: from Pygmalion to Copp´elia to Pinocchio to the movies AI and Centennial Man, we
have the legend of a doll/robot coming to life and striving to be accepted as a human with
human rights. In real life, Saudi Arabia made headlines by giving honorary citizenship to
Sophia, a human-looking puppet capable of speaking preprogrammed lines.


