1036
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
fact that ships do swim (“privet”) in Russian ampliﬁes this point.) English speakers have
not yet settled on a precise deﬁnition for the word “think”—does it require “a brain” or just
“brain-like parts?”
Again, the issue was addressed by Turing. He notes that we never have any direct ev-
idence about the internal mental states of other humans—a kind of mental solipsism. Nev-
ertheless, Turing says, “Instead of arguing continually over this point, it is usual to have the
polite convention that everyone thinks.” Turing argues that we would also extend the polite
Polite convention
convention to machines, if only we had experience with ones that act intelligently. How-
ever, now that we do have some experience, it seems that our willingness to ascribe sentience
depends at least as much on humanoid appearance and voice as on pure intelligence.
28.2.1 The Chinese room
The philosopher John Searle rejects the polite convention. His famous Chinese room argu-
Chinese room
ment (Searle, 1990) goes as follows: Imagine a human, who understands only English, inside
a room that contains a rule book, written in English, and various stacks of paper. Pieces of
paper containing indecipherable symbols are slipped under the door to the room. The human
follows the instructions in the rule book, ﬁnding symbols in the stacks, writing symbols on
new pieces of paper, rearranging the stacks, and so on. Eventually, the instructions will cause
one or more symbols to be transcribed onto a piece of paper that is passed back to the outside
world. From the outside, we see a system that is taking input in the form of Chinese sentences
and generating ﬂuent, intelligent Chinese responses.
Searle then argues: it is given that the human does not understand Chinese. The rule book
and the stacks of paper, being just pieces of paper, do not understand Chinese. Therefore,
there is no understanding of Chinese. And Searle says that the Chinese room is doing the
same thing that a computer would do, so therefore computers generate no understanding.
Searle (1980) is a proponent of biological naturalism, according to which mental states
Biological naturalism
are high-level emergent features that are caused by low-level physical processes in the neu-
rons, and it is the (unspeciﬁed) properties of the neurons that matter: according to Searle’s
biases, neurons have “it” and transistors do not. There have been many refutations of Searle’s
argument, but no consensus. His argument could equally well be used (perhaps by robots) to
argue that a human cannot have true understanding; after all, a human is made out of cells,
the cells do not understand, therefore there is no understanding. In fact, that is the plot of
Terry Bisson’s (1990) science ﬁction story They’re Made Out of Meat, in which alien robots
explore Earth and can’t believe that hunks of meat could possibly be sentient. How they can
be remains a mystery.
28.2.2 Consciousness and qualia
Running through all the debates about strong AI is the issue of consciousness: awareness
Consciousness
of the outside world, and of the self, and the subjective experience of living. The technical
term for the intrinsic nature of experiences is qualia (from the Latin word meaning, roughly,
Qualia
“of what kind”). The big question is whether machines can have qualia. In the movie 2001,
when astronaut David Bowman is disconnecting the “cognitive circuits” of the HAL 9000
computer, it says “I’m afraid, Dave. Dave, my mind is going. I can feel it.” Does HAL
actually have feelings (and deserve sympathy)? Or is the reply just an algorithmic response,
no different from “Error 404: not found”?


Section 28.3
The Ethics of AI
1037
There is a similar question for animals: pet owners are certain that their dog or cat has
consciousness, but not all scientists agree. Crickets change their behavior based on tempera-
ture, but few people would say that crickets experience the feeling of being warm or cold.
One reason that the problem of consciousness is hard is that it remains ill-deﬁned, even
after centuries of debate. But help may be on the way. Recently philosophers have teamed
with neuroscientists under the auspices of the Templeton Foundation to start a series of ex-
periments that could resolve some of the issues. Advocates of two leading theories of con-
sciousness (global workspace theory and integrated information theory) have agreed that the
experiments could conﬁrm one theory over the other—a rarity in philosophy.
Alan Turing (1950) concedes that the question of consciousness is a difﬁcult one, but
denies that it has much relevance to the practice of AI: “I do not wish to give the impression
that I think there is no mystery about consciousness ... But I do not think these mysteries
necessarily need to be solved before we can answer the question with which we are concerned
in this paper.” We agree with Turing—we are interested in creating programs that behave
intelligently. Individual aspects of consciousness—awareness, self-awareness, attention—
can be programmed and can be part of an intelligent machine. The additional project of
making a machine conscious in exactly the way humans are is not one that we are equipped
to take on. We do agree that behaving intelligently will require some degree of awareness,
which will differ from task to task, and that tasks involving interaction with humans will
require a model of human subjective experience.
In the matter of modeling experience, humans have a clear advantage over machines,
because they can use their own subjective apparatus to appreciate the subjective experience
of others. For example, if you want to know what it’s like when someone hits their thumb
with a hammer, you can hit your thumb with a hammer. Machines have no such capability—
although unlike humans, they can run each other’s code.
28.3 The Ethics of AI
Given that AI is a powerful technology, we have a moral obligation to use it well, to promote
the positive aspects and avoid or mitigate the negative ones.
The positive aspects are many. For example, AI can save lives through improved med-
ical diagnosis, new medical discoveries, better prediction of extreme weather events, and
safer driving with driver assistance and (eventually) self-driving technologies. There are also
many opportunities to improve lives. Microsoft’s AI for Humanitarian Action program ap-
plies AI to recovering from natural disasters, addressing the needs of children, protecting
refugees, and promoting human rights. Google’s AI for Social Good program supports work
on rainforest protection, human rights jurisprudence, pollution monitoring, measurement of
fossil fuel emissions, crisis counseling, news fact checking, suicide prevention, recycling, and
other issues. The University of Chicago’s Center for Data Science for Social Good applies
machine learning to problems in criminal justice, economic development, education, public
health, energy, and environment.
AI applications in crop management and food production help feed the world. Optimiza-
tion of business processes using machine learning will make businesses more productive,
increasing wealth and providing more employment. Automation can replace the tedious and
dangerous tasks that many workers face, and free them to concentrate on more interesting


1038
Chapter 28
Philosophy, Ethics, and Safety of AI
aspects. People with disabilities will beneﬁt from AI-based assistance in seeing, hearing, and
mobility. Machine translation already allows people from different cultures to communicate.
Software-based AI solutions have near zero marginal cost of production, and so have the po-
tential to democratize access to advanced technology (even as other aspects of software have
the potential to centralize power).
Despite these many positive aspects, we shouldn’t ignore the negatives. Many new tech-
nologies have had unintended negative side effects: nuclear ﬁssion brought Chernobyl and
Negative side eﬀects
the threat of global destruction; the internal combustion engine brought air pollution, global
warming, and the paving of paradise. Other technologies can have negative effects even when
used as intended, such as sarin gas, AR-15 riﬂes, and telephone solicitation. Automation will
create wealth, but under current economic conditions much of that wealth will ﬂow to the
owners of the automated systems, leading to increased income inequality. This can be dis-
ruptive to a well-functioning society. In developing countries, the traditional path to growth
through low-cost manufacturing for export may be cut off, as wealthy countries adopt fully
automated manufacturing facilities on-shore. Our ethical and governance decisions will dic-
tate the level of inequality that AI will engender.
All scientists and engineers face ethical considerations of what projects they should or
should not take on, and how they can make sure the execution of the project is safe and bene-
ﬁcial. In 2010, the UK’s Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council held a meeting
to develop a set of Principles of Robotics. In subsequent years other government agencies,
nonproﬁt organizations, and companies created similar sets of principles. The gist is that ev-
ery organization that creates AI technology, and everyone in the organization, has a responsi-
bility to make sure the technology contributes to good, not harm. The most commonly-cited
principles are:
Ensure safety
Establish accountability
Ensure fairness
Uphold human rights and values
Respect privacy
Reﬂect diversity/inclusion
Promote collaboration
Avoid concentration of power
Provide transparency
Acknowledge legal/policy implications
Limit harmful uses of AI
Contemplate implications for employment
Note that many of the principles, such as “ensure safety,” have applicability to all software or
hardware systems, not just AI systems. Several principles are worded in a vague way, making
them difﬁcult to measure or enforce. That is in part because AI is a big ﬁeld with many
subﬁelds, each of which has a different set of historical norms and different relationships
between the AI developers and the stakeholders. Mittelstadt (2019) suggests that the subﬁelds
should each develop more speciﬁc actionable guidelines and case precedents.
28.3.1 Lethal autonomous weapons
The UN deﬁnes a lethal autonomous weapon as one that locates, selects, and engages (i.e.,
kills) human targets without human supervision. Various weapons fulﬁll some of these cri-
teria. For example, land mines have been used since the 17th century: they can select and
engage targets in a limited sense according to the degree of pressure exerted or the quan-
tity of metal present, but they cannot go out and locate targets by themselves. (Land mines
are banned under the Ottawa Treaty.) Guided missiles, in use since the 1940s, can chase
targets, but they have to be pointed in the right general direction by a human. Auto-ﬁring


Section 28.3
The Ethics of AI
1039
radar-controlled guns have been used to defend naval ships since the 1970s; they are mainly
intended to destroy incoming missiles, but they could also attack manned aircraft. Although
the word “autonomous” is often used to describe unmanned air vehicles or drones, most such
weapons are both remotely piloted and require human actuation of the lethal payload.
At the time of writing, several weapons systems seem to have crossed the line into full au-
tonomy. For example Israel’s Harop missile is a “loitering munition” with a ten-foot wingspan
and a ﬁfty-pound warhead. It searches for up to six hours in a given geographical region for
any target that meets a given criterion and then destroys it. The criterion could be “emits
a radar signal resembling antiaircraft radar” or “looks like a tank.” The Turkish manufac-
turer STM advertises its Kargu quadcopter—which carries up to 1.5kg of explosives—as
capable of “Autonomous hit . . . targets selected on images ...tracking moving targets ...anti-
personnel . . . face recognition.”
Autonomous weapons have been called the “third revolution in warfare” after gunpowder
and nuclear weapons. Their military potential is obvious. For example, few experts doubt
that autonomous ﬁghter aircraft would defeat any human pilot. Autonomous aircraft, tanks,
and submarines can be cheaper, faster, more maneuverable, and have longer range than their
manned counterparts.
Since 2014, the United Nations in Geneva has conducted regular discussions under the
auspices of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW) on the question of
whether to ban lethal autonomous weapons. At the time of writing, 30 nations, ranging
in size from China to the Holy See, have declared their support for an international treaty,
while other key countries—including Israel, Russia, South Korea, and the United States—are
opposed to a ban.
The debate over autonomous weapons includes legal, ethical and practical aspects. The
legal issues are governed primarily by the CCW, which requires the possibility of discrim-
inating between combatants and non-combatants, the judgment of military necessity for an
attack, and the assessment of proportionality between the military value of a target and the
possibility of collateral damage. The feasibility of meeting these criteria is an engineering
question—one whose answer will undoubtedly change over time. At present, discrimination
seems feasible in some circumstances and will undoubtedly improve rapidly, but necessity
and proportionality are not presently feasible: they require that machines make subjective
and situational judgments that are considerably more difﬁcult than the relatively simple tasks
of searching for and engaging potential targets. For these reasons, it would be legal to use
autonomous weapons only in circumstances where a human operator can reasonably predict
that the execution of the mission will not result in civilians being targeted or the weapons
conducting unnecessary or disproportionate attacks. This means that, for the time being, only
very restricted missions could be undertaken by autonomous weapons.
On the ethical side, some ﬁnd it simply morally unacceptable to delegate the decision to
kill humans to a machine. For example, Germany’s ambassador in Geneva has stated that
it “will not accept that the decision over life and death is taken solely by an autonomous
system” while Japan “has no plan to develop robots with humans out of the loop, which may
be capable of committing murder.” Gen. Paul Selva, at the time the second-ranking military
ofﬁcer in the United States, said in 2017, “I don’t think it’s reasonable for us to put robots
in charge of whether or not we take a human life.” Finally, Ant´onio Guterres, the head of
the United Nations, stated in 2019 that “machines with the power and discretion to take lives


