CHAPTER 29
THE FUTURE OF AI
In which we try to see a short distance ahead.
In Chapter 2, we decided to view AI as the task of designing approximately rational agents. A
variety of different agent designs were considered, ranging from reﬂex agents to knowledge-
based decision-theoretic agents to deep learning agents using reinforcement learning. There is
also variety in the component technologies from which these designs are assembled: logical,
probabilistic, or neural reasoning; atomic, factored, or structured representations of states;
various learning algorithms from various types of data; sensors and actuators to interact with
the world. Finally, we have seen a variety of applications, in medicine, ﬁnance, transportation,
communication, and other ﬁelds. There has been progress on all these fronts, both in our
scientiﬁc understanding and in our technological capabilities.
Most experts are optimistic about continued progress; as we saw on page 46, the median
estimate is for approximately human-level AI across a broad variety of tasks somewhere in
the next 50 to 100 years. Within the next decade, AI is predicted to add trillions of dollars to
the economy each year. But as we also saw, there are some critics who think general AI is
centuries off, and there are numerous ethical concerns about the fairness, equity, and lethality
of AI. In this chapter, we ask: where are we headed and what remains to be done? We do
that by asking whether we have the right components, architectures, and goals to make AI a
successful technology that delivers beneﬁts to the world.
29.1 AI Components
This section examines the components of AI systems and the extent to which each of them
might accelerate or hinder future progress.
Sensors and actuators
For much of the history of AI, direct access to the world has been glaringly absent. With a
few notable exceptions, AI systems were built in such a way that humans had to supply the
inputs and interpret the outputs. Meanwhile, robotic systems focused on low-level tasks in
which high-level reasoning and planning were largely ignored and the need for perception
was minimized. This was partly due to the great expense and engineering effort required to
get real robots to work at all, and partly because of the lack of sufﬁcient processing power
and sufﬁciently effective algorithms to handle high-bandwidth visual input.
The situation has changed rapidly in recent years with the availability of ready-made
programmable robots. These, in turn, have beneﬁted from compact reliable motor drives and
improved sensors. The cost of lidar for a self-driving car has fallen from $75,000 to $1,000,


1064
Chapter 29
The Future of AI
and a single-chip version may reach $10 per unit (Poulton and Watts, 2016). Radar sensors,
once capable of only coarse-grained detection, are now sensitive enough to count the number
of sheets in a stack of paper (Yeo et al., 2018).
The demand for better image processing in cellphone cameras has given us inexpensive
high-resolution cameras for use in robotics. MEMS (micro-electromechanical systems) tech-
nology has supplied miniaturized accelerometers, gyroscopes, and actuators small enough to
ﬁt in artiﬁcial ﬂying insects (Floreano et al., 2009; Fuller et al., 2014). It may be possible to
combine millions of MEMS devices to produce powerful macroscopic actuators. 3-D printing
(Muth et al., 2014) and bioprinting (Kolesky et al., 2014) have made it easier to experiment
with prototypes.
Thus, we see that AI systems are at the cusp of moving from primarily software-only sys-
tems to useful embedded robotic systems. The state of robotics today is roughly comparable
to the state of personal computers in the early 1980s: at that time personal computers were
becoming available, but it would take another decade before they became commonplace. It is
likely that ﬂexible, intelligent robots will ﬁrst make strides in industry (where environments
are more controlled, tasks are more repetitive, and the value of an investment is easier to
measure) before the home market (where there is more variability in environment and tasks).
Representing the state of the world
Keeping track of the world requires perception as well as updating of internal representations.
Chapter 4 showed how to keep track of atomic state representations; Chapter 7 described
how to do it for factored (propositional) state representations; Chapter 10 extended this to
ﬁrst-order logic; and Chapter 14 described probabilistic reasoning over time in uncertain
environments. Chapter 22 introduced recurrent neural networks, which are also capable of
maintaining a state representation over time.
Current ﬁltering and perception algorithms can be combined to do a reasonable job of rec-
ognizing objects (“that’s a cat”) and reporting low-level predicates (“the cup is on the table”).
Recognizing higher-level actions, such as “Dr. Russell is having a cup of tea with Dr. Norvig
while discussing plans for next week,” is more difﬁcult. Currently it can sometimes be done
(see Figure 27.17 on page 1015) given enough training examples, but future progress will
require techniques that generalize to novel situations without requiring exhaustive examples
(Poppe, 2010; Kang and Wildes, 2016).
Another problem is that although the approximate ﬁltering algorithms from Chapter 14
can handle quite large environments, they are still dealing with a factored representation—
they have random variables, but do not represent objects and relations explicitly. Also, their
notion of time is restricted to step-by-step change; given the recent trajectory of a ball, we
can predict where it will be at time t + 1, but it is difﬁcult to represent the abstract idea that
what goes up must come down.
Section 18.1 explained how probability and ﬁrst-order logic can be combined to solve
these problems; Section 18.2 showed how we can handle uncertainty about the identity of
objects; and Chapter 27 showed how recurrent neural networks enable computer vision to
track the world; but we don’t yet have a good way of putting all these techniques together.
Chapter 25 showed how word embeddings and similar representations can free us from the
strict bounds of concepts deﬁned by necessary and sufﬁcient conditions. It remains a daunting
task to deﬁne general, reusable representation schemes for complex domains.


Section 29.1
AI Components
1065
Selecting actions
The primary difﬁculty in action selection in the real world is coping with long-term plans—
such as graduating from college in four years—that consist of billions of primitive steps.
Search algorithms that consider sequences of primitive actions scale only to tens or perhaps
hundreds of steps. It is only by imposing hierarchical structure on behavior that we humans
cope at all. We saw in Section 11.4 how to use hierarchical representations to handle problems
of this scale; furthermore, work in hierarchical reinforcement learning has succeeded in
combining these ideas with the MDP formalism described in Chapter 16.
As yet, these methods have not been extended to the partially observable case (POMDPs).
Moreover, algorithms for solving POMDPs are typically using the same atomic state repre-
sentation we used for the search algorithms of Chapter 3. There is clearly a great deal of
work to do here, but the technical foundations are largely in place for making progress. The
main missing element is an effective method for constructing the hierarchical representations
of state and behavior that are necessary for decision making over long time scales.
Deciding what we want
Chapter 3 introduced search algorithms to ﬁnd a goal state. But goal-based agents are brittle
when the environment is uncertain, and when there are multiple factors to consider. In princi-
ple, utility-maximization agents address those issues in a completely general way. The ﬁelds
of economics and game theory, as well as AI, make use of this insight: just declare what you
want to optimize, and what each action does, and we can compute the optimal action.
In practice, however, we now realize that the task of picking the right utility function is a
challenging problem in its own right. Imagine, for example, the complex web of interacting
preferences that must be understood by an agent operating as an ofﬁce assistant for a human
being. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that each human is different, so an agent just
“out of the box” will not have enough experience with any one individual to learn an accurate
preference model; it will necessarily need to operate under preference uncertainty. Further
complexity arises if we want to ensure that our agents are acting in a way that is fair and
equitable for society, rather than just one individual.
We do not yet have much experience with building complex real-world preference mod-
els, let alone probability distributions over such models. Although there are factored for-
malisms, similar to Bayes nets, that are intended to decompose preferences over complex
states, it has proven difﬁcult to use these formalisms in practice. One reason may be that
preferences over states are really compiled from preferences over state histories, which are
described by reward functions (see Chapter 16). Even if the reward function is simple, the
corresponding utility function may be very complex.
This suggests that we take seriously the task of knowledge engineering for reward func-
tions as a way of conveying to our agents what we want them to do. The idea of inverse
reinforcement learning (Section 23.6) is one approach to this problem when we have an
expert who can perform a task, but not explain it. We could also use better languages for
expressing what we want. For example, in robotics, linear temporal logic makes it easier to
say what things we want to happen in the near future, what things we want to avoid, and what
states we want to persist forever (Littman et al., 2017). We need better ways of saying what
we want and better ways for robots to interpret the information we provide.


1066
Chapter 29
The Future of AI
The computer industry as a whole has developed a powerful ecosystem for aggregating
user preferences. When you click on something in an app, online game, social network, or
shopping site, that serves as a recommendation that you (and your similar peers) would like
to see similar things in the future. (Or it might be that the site is confusing and you clicked
on the wrong thing—the data are always noisy.) The feedback inherent in this system makes
it very effective in the short run for picking out ever more addictive games and videos.
But these systems often fail to provide an easy way of opting out—your device will auto-
play a relevant video, but it is less likely to tell you “maybe it is time to put away your devices
and take a relaxing walk in nature.” A shopping site will help you ﬁnd clothes that match your
style, but will not address world peace or ending hunger and poverty. To the extent that the
menu of choices is driven by companies trying to proﬁt from a customer’s attention, the menu
will remain incomplete.
However, companies do respond to customers’ interests, and many customers have voiced
the opinion that they are interested in a fair and sustainable world. Tim O’Reilly explains why
proﬁt is not the only motive with the following analogy: “Money is like gasoline during a road
trip. You don’t want to run out of gas on your trip, but you’re not doing a tour of gas stations.
You have to pay attention to money, but it shouldn’t be about the money.”
Tristan Harris’s time well spent movement at the Center for Humane Technology is a
Time well spent
step towards giving us more well-rounded choices (Harris, 2016). The movement addresses
an issue that was recognized by Herbert Simon in 1971: “A wealth of information creates a
poverty of attention.” Perhaps in the future we will have personal agents that stick up for
Personal agent
our true long-term interests rather than the interests of the corporations whose apps currently
ﬁll our devices. It will be the agent’s job to mediate the offerings of various vendors, protect
us from addictive attention-grabbers, and guide us towards the goals that really matter to us.
Learning
Chapters 19, 21, 22, and 23 described how agents can learn. Current algorithms can cope
with quite large problems, reaching or exceeding human capabilities in many tasks—as long
as we have sufﬁcient training examples and we are dealing with a predeﬁned vocabulary of
features and concepts. But learning can stall when data are sparse, or unsupervised, or when
we are dealing with complex representations.
Much of the recent resurgence of AI in the popular press and in industry is due to the
success of deep learning (Chapter 22). On the one hand, this can be seen as the incremental
maturation of the subﬁeld of neural networks. On the other hand, we can see it as a rev-
olutionary leap in capabilities spurred by a conﬂuence of factors: the availability of more
training data thanks to the Internet, increased processing power from specialized hardware,
and a few algorithmic tricks, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs), batch normal-
ization, dropout, and the rectiﬁed linear (ReLU) activation function.
The future should see continued emphasis on improving deep learning for the tasks it
excels at, and also extending it to cover other tasks. The brand name “deep learning” has
proven to be so popular that we should expect its use to continue, even if the mix of techniques
that fuel it changes considerably.
We have seen the emergence of the ﬁeld of data science as the conﬂuence of statistics,
programming, and domain expertise. While we can expect to see continued development in
the tools and techniques necessary to acquire, manage, and maintain big data, we will also


