Section 29.2
AI Architectures
1071
The truly gargantuan power of today’s machines tempts one to think that we could bypass
all the clever devices and rely more on brute force. So let’s try to counteract this tendency.
We begin with what physicists believe to be the speed of the ultimate 1kg computing device:
about 1051 operations per second, or a billion trillion trillion times faster than the fastest su-
percomputer as of 2020 (Lloyd, 2000).1 Then we propose a simple task: enumerating strings
of English words, much as Borges proposed in The Library of Babel. Borges stipulated books
of 410 pages. Would that be feasible? Not quite. In fact, the computer running for a year
could enumerate only the 11-word strings.
Now consider the fact that a detailed plan for a human life consists of (very roughly)
twenty trillion potential muscle actuations (Russell, 2019), and you begin to see the scale
of the problem. A computer that is a billion trillion trillion times more powerful than the
human brain is much further from being rational than a slug is from overtaking the starship
Enterprise traveling at warp nine.
With these considerations in mind, it seems that the goal of building rational agents is
perhaps a little too ambitious. Rather than aiming for something that cannot possibly exist,
we should consider a different normative target—one that necessarily exists. Recall from
Chapter 2 the following simple idea:
agent = architecture+program.
Now ﬁx the agent architecture (the underlying machine capabilities, perhaps with a ﬁxed soft-
ware layer on top) and allow the agent program to vary over all possible programs that the
architecture can support. In any given task environment, one of these programs (or an equiv-
alence class of them) delivers the best possible performance—perhaps not close to perfect
rationality, but still better than any other agent program. We say that this program satisﬁes
the criterion of bounded optimality. Clearly it exists, and clearly it constitutes a desirable
Bounded optimality
goal. The trick is ﬁnding it, or something close to it.
For some elementary classes of agent programs in simple real-time environments, it is
possible to identify bounded-optimal agent programs (Etzioni, 1989; Russell and Subrama-
nian, 1995). The success of Monte Carlo tree search has revived interest in metalevel decision
making, and there is reason to hope that bounded optimality within more complex families of
agent programs can be achieved by techniques such as metalevel reinforcement learning. It
should also be possible to develop a constructive theory of architecture, beginning with theo-
rems on the bounded optimality of suitable methods of combining different bounded-optimal
components such as reﬂex and action–value systems.
General AI
Much of the progress in AI in the 21st century so far has been guided by competition on nar-
row tasks, such as the DARPA Grand Challenge for autonomous cars, the ImageNet object
recognition competition, or playing Go, chess, poker, or Jeopardy! against a world cham-
pion. For each separate task, we build a separate AI system, usually with a separate machine
learning model trained from scratch with data collected speciﬁcally for this task. But a truly
intelligent agent should be able to do more than one thing. Alan Turing (1950) proposed his
list (page 1033) and science ﬁction author Robert Heinlein (1973) countered with:
1
We gloss over the fact that this device consumes the entire energy output of a star and operates at a billion
degrees centigrade.


1072
Chapter 29
The Future of AI
A human being should be able to change a diaper, plan an invasion, butcher a hog,
conn a ship, design a building, write a sonnet, balance accounts, build a wall, set
a bone, comfort the dying, take orders, give orders, cooperate, act alone, solve
equations, analyse a new problem, pitch manure, program a computer, cook a
tasty meal, ﬁght efﬁciently, die gallantly. Specialization is for insects.
So far, no AI system measures up to either of these lists, and some proponents of general or
human-level AI (HLAI) insist that continued work on speciﬁc tasks (or on individual com-
ponents) will not be enough to reach mastery on a wide variety of tasks; that we will need a
fundamentally new approach. It seems to us that numerous new breakthroughs will indeed be
necessary, but overall, AI as a ﬁeld has made a reasonable exploration/exploitation tradeoff,
assembling a portfolio of components, improving on particular tasks, while also exploring
promising and sometimes far-out new ideas.
It would have been a mistake to tell the Wright brothers in 1903 to stop work on their
single-task airplane and design an “artiﬁcial general ﬂight” machine that can take off verti-
cally, ﬂy faster than sound, carry hundreds of passengers, and land on the moon. It also would
have been a mistake to follow up their ﬁrst ﬂight with an annual competition to make spruce
wood biplanes incrementally better.
We have seen that work on components can spur new ideas; for example, generative
adversarial networks (GANs) and transformer language models each opened up new areas of
research. We have also seen steps towards “diversity of behaviour.” For example, machine
translation systems in the 1990s were built one at a time for each language pair (such as
French to English), but today a single system can identifying the input text as being one of a
hundred languages, and translate it into any of 100 target languages. Another natural language
system can perform ﬁve distinct tasks with one joint model (Hashimoto et al., 2016).
AI engineering
The ﬁeld of computer programming started with a few extraordinary pioneers. But it didn’t
reach the status of a major industry until a practice of software engineering was developed,
with a powerful collection of widely available tools, and a thriving ecosystem of teachers,
students, practitioners, entrepreneurs, investors, and customers.
The AI industry has not yet reached that level of maturity. We do have a variety of pow-
erful tools and frameworks, such as TensorFlow, Keras, PyTorch, CAFFE, Scikit-Learn and
SCIPY. But many of the most promising approaches, such as GANs and deep reinforcement
learning, have proven to be difﬁcult to work with—they require experience and a degree of
ﬁddling to get them to train properly in a new domain. We don’t have enough experts to do
this across all the domains where we need it, and we don’t yet have the tools and ecosystem
to let less-expert practitioners succeed.
Google’s Jeff Dean sees a future where we will want machine learning to handle millions
of tasks; it won’t be feasible to develop each of them from scratch, so he suggests that rather
than building each new system from scratch, we should start with a single huge system and,
for each new task, extract from it the parts that are relevant to the task. We have seen some
steps in this direction, such as the transformer language models (e.g., BERT, GPT-2) with
billions of parameters, and an “outrageously large” ensemble neural network architecture
that scales up to 68 billion parameters in one experiment (Shazeer et al., 2017). Much work
remains to be done.


Section 29.2
AI Architectures
1073
The future
Which way will the future go? Science ﬁction authors seem to favor dystopian futures over
utopian ones, probably because they make for more interesting plots. So far, AI seems to ﬁt
in with other powerful revolutionary technologies such as printing, plumbing, air travel, and
telephony. All these technologies have made positive impacts, but also have some unintended
side effects that disproportionately impact disadvantaged classes. We would do well to invest
in minimizing the negative impacts.
AI is also different from previous revolutionary technologies. Improving printing, plumb-
ing, air travel, and telephony to their logical limits would not produce anything to threaten
human supremacy in the world. Improving AI to its logical limit certainly could.
In conclusion, AI has made great progress in its short history, but the ﬁnal sentence of
Alan Turing’s (1950) essay on Computing Machinery and Intelligence is still valid today:
We can see only a short distance ahead,
but we can see that much remains to be done.


