Section 29.1
AI Components
1067
need advances in transfer learning so that we can take advantage of data in one domain to
improve performance on a related domain.
The vast majority of machine learning research today assumes a factored representation,
learning a function h : Rn →R for regression and h : Rn →{0,1} for classiﬁcation. Machine
learning has been less successful for problems that have only a small amount of data, or
problems that require the construction of new structured, hierarchical representations. Deep
learning, especially with convolutional networks applied to computer vision problems, has
demonstrated some success in going from low-level pixels to intermediate-level concepts like
Eye and Mouth, then to Face, and ﬁnally to Person or Cat.
A challenge for the future is to more smoothly combine learning and prior knowledge.
If we give a computer a problem it has not encountered before—say, recognizing different
models of cars—we don’t want the system to be powerless until it has been fed millions of
labeled examples.
The ideal system should be able to draw on what it already knows: it should already have
a model of how vision works, and how the design and branding of products in general work;
now it should use transfer learning to apply that to the new problem of car models. It should
be able to ﬁnd on its own information about car models, drawing from text, images, and
video available on the Internet. It should be capable of apprenticeship learning: having a
conversation with a teacher, and not just asking “may I have a thousand images of a Corolla,”
but rather being able to understand advice like “the Insight is similar to the Prius, but the
Insight has a larger grille.” It should know that each model comes in a small range of possible
colors, but that a car can be repainted, so there is a chance that it might see a car in a color
that was not in the training set. (If it didn’t know that, it should be capable of learning it, or
being told about it.)
All this requires a communication and representation language that humans and comput-
ers can share; we can’t expect a human analyst to directly modify a model with millions of
weights. Probabilistic models (including probabilistic programming languages) give humans
some ability to describe what we know, but these models are not yet well integrated with
other learning mechanisms.
The work of Bengio and LeCun (2007) is one step towards this integration. Recently
Yann LeCun has suggested that the term “deep learning” should be replaced with the more
general differentiable programming (Siskind and Pearlmutter, 2016; Li et al., 2018); this
Diﬀerentiable
programming
suggests that our general programming languages and our machine learning models could be
merged together.
Right now, it is common to build a deep learning model that is differentiable, and thus can
be trained to minimize loss, and retrained when circumstances change. But that deep learning
model is only one part of a larger software system that takes in data, massages the data, feeds
it to the model, and ﬁgures out what to do with the model’s output. All these other parts of the
larger system were written by hand by a programmer, and thus are nondifferentiable, which
means that when circumstances change, it is up to the programmer to recognize any problems
and ﬁx them by hand. With differentiable programming, the hope is that the entire system is
subject to automated optimization.
The end goal is to be able to express what we know in whatever form is convenient to us:
informal advice given in natural language, a strong mathematical law like F = ma, a statistical
model accompanied by data, or a probabilistic program with unknown parameters that can


1068
Chapter 29
The Future of AI
be automatically optimized through gradient descent. Our computer models will learn from
conversations with human experts as well as by using all the available data.
Yann LeCun, Geoffrey Hinton, and others have suggested that the current emphasis on
supervised learning (and to a lesser extent reinforcement learning) is not sustainable—that
computer models will have to rely on weakly supervised learning, in which some supervi-
sion is given with a small number of labeled examples and/or a small number of rewards, but
most of the learning is unsupervised, because unannotated data are so much more plentiful.
LeCun uses the term predictive learning for an unsupervised learning system that can
Predictive learning
model the world and learn to predict aspects of future states of the world—not just predict
labels for inputs that are independent and identically distributed with respect to past data, and
not just predict a value function over states. He suggests that GANs (generative adversarial
networks) can be used to learn to minimize the difference between predictions and reality.
Geoffrey Hinton stated in 2017 that “My view is throw it all away and start again,” mean-
ing that the overall idea of learning by adjusting parameters in a network is enduring, but the
speciﬁcs of the architecture of the networks and the technique of back-propagation need to be
rethought. Smolensky (1988) had a prescription for how to think about connectionist models;
his thoughts remain relevant today.
Resources
Machine learning research and development has been accelerated by the increasing availabil-
ity of data, storage, processing power, software, trained experts, and the investments needed to
support them. Since the 1970s, there has been a 100,000-fold speedup in general-purpose pro-
cessors and an additional 1,000-fold speedup due to specialized machine learning hardware.
The Web has served as a rich source of images, videos, speech, text, and semi-structured data,
currently adding over 1018 bytes every day.
Hundreds of high-quality data sets are available for a range of tasks in computer vision,
speech recognition, and natural language processing. If the data you need is not already
available, you can often assemble it from other sources, or engage humans to label data for
you through a crowdsourcing platform. Validating the data obtained in this way becomes an
important part of the overall workﬂow (Hirth et al., 2013).
An important recent development is the shift from shared data to shared models. The
Shared model
major cloud service providers (e.g., Amazon, Microsoft, Google, Alibaba, IBM, Salesforce)
have begun competing to offer machine learning APIs with pre-built models for speciﬁc tasks
such as visual object recognition, speech recognition, and machine translation. These models
can be used as is, or can serve as a baseline to be customized with your particular data for
your particular application.
We expect that these models will improve over time, and that it will become unusual to
start a machine learning project from scratch, just as it is now unusual to do a Web develop-
ment project from scratch, with no libraries. It is possible that a big jump in model quality
will occur when it becomes economical to process all the video on the Web; for example, the
YouTube platform alone adds 300 hours of video every minute.
Moore’s law has made it more cost effective to process data; a megabyte of storage cost $1
million in 1969 and less then $0.02 in 2019, and supercomputer throughput has increased by a
factor of more than 1010 in that time. Specialized hardware components for machine learning
such as graphics processing units (GPUs), tensor cores, tensor processing units (TPUs), and


Section 29.2
AI Architectures
1069
ﬁeld programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) are hundreds of times faster than conventional CPUs
for machine learning training (Vasilache et al., 2014; Jouppi et al., 2017). In 2014 it took a
full day to train an ImageNet model; in 2018 it takes just 2 minutes (Ying et al., 2018).
The OpenAI Institute reports that the amount of compute power used to train the largest
machine learning models doubled every 3.5 months from 2012 to 2018, reaching over an
exaﬂop/second-day for ALPHAZERO (although they also report that some very inﬂuential
work used 100 million times less computing power (Amodei and Hernandez, 2018)). The
same economic trends that have made cell-phone cameras cheaper and better also apply to
processors—we will see continued progress in low-power, high-performance computing that
beneﬁts from economies of scale.
There is a possibility that quantum computers could accelerate AI. Currently there are
some fast quantum algorithms for the linear algebra operations used in machine learning
(Harrow et al., 2009; Dervovic et al., 2018), but no quantum computer capable of running
them. We have some example applications of tasks such as image classiﬁcation (Mott et al.,
2017) where quantum algorithms are as good as classical algorithms on small problems.
Current quantum computers handle only a few tens of bits, whereas machine learning
algorithms often handle inputs with millions of bits and create models with hundreds of mil-
lions of parameters. So we need breakthroughs in both quantum hardware and software to
make quantum computing practical for large-scale machine learning. Alternatively, there may
be a division of labor—perhaps a quantum algorithm to efﬁciently search the space of hyper-
parameters while the normal training process runs on conventional computers—but we don’t
know how to do that yet. Research on quantum algorithms can sometimes inspire new and
better algorithms on classical computers (Tang, 2018).
We have also seen exponential growth in the number of publications, people, and dollars
in AI/machine learning/data science. Dean et al. (2018) show that the number of papers
about “machine learning” on arXiv doubled every two years from 2009 to 2017. Investors are
funding startup companies in these ﬁelds, large companies are hiring and spending as they
determine their AI strategy, and governments are investing to make sure their country doesn’t
fall too far behind.
29.2 AI Architectures
It is natural to ask, “Which of the agent architectures in Chapter 2 should an agent use?” The
answer is, “All of them!” Reﬂex responses are needed for situations in which time is of the
essence, whereas knowledge-based deliberation allows the agent to plan ahead. Learning is
convenient when we have lots of data, and necessary when the environment is changing, or
when human designers have insufﬁcient knowledge of the domain.
AI has long had a split between symbolic systems (based on logical and probabilistic
inference) and connectionist systems (based on loss minimization over a large number of
uninterpreted parameters). A continuing challenge for AI is to bring these two together,
to capture the best of both. Symbolic systems allow us to string together long chains of
reasoning and to take advantage of the expressive power of structured representations, while
connectionist systems can recognize patterns even in the face of noisy data. One line of
research aims to combine probabilistic programming with deep learning, although as yet the
various proposals are limited in the extent to which the approaches are truly merged.


1070
Chapter 29
The Future of AI
Agents also need ways to control their own deliberations. They must be able to use the
available time well, and cease deliberating when action is demanded. For example, a taxi-
driving agent that sees an accident ahead must decide in a split second whether to brake or
swerve. It should also spend that split second thinking about the most important questions,
such as whether the lanes to the left and right are clear and whether there is a large truck close
behind, rather than worrying about where to pick up the next passenger. These issues are
usually studied under the heading of real-time AI. As AI systems move into more complex
Real-time AI
domains, all problems will become real-time, because the agent will never have long enough
to solve the decision problem exactly.
Clearly, there is a pressing need for general methods of controlling deliberation, rather
than speciﬁc recipes for what to think about in each situation. The ﬁrst useful idea is the
anytime algorithms (Dean and Boddy, 1988; Horvitz, 1987): an algorithm whose output
Anytime algorithm
quality improves gradually over time, so that it has a reasonable decision ready whenever it is
interrupted. Examples of anytime algorithms include iterative deepening in game-tree search
and MCMC in Bayesian networks.
The second technique for controlling deliberation is decision-theoretic metareasoning
Decision-theoretic
metareasoning
(Russell and Wefald, 1989; Horvitz and Breese, 1996; Hay et al., 2012). This method, which
was mentioned brieﬂy in Sections 3.6.5 and 6.7, applies the theory of information value
(Chapter 15) to the selection of individual computations (Section 3.6.5). The value of a
computation depends on both its cost (in terms of delaying action) and its beneﬁts (in terms
of improved decision quality).
Metareasoning techniques can be used to design better search algorithms and to guarantee
that the algorithms have the anytime property. Monte Carlo tree search is one example: the
choice of leaf node at which to begin the next playout is made by an approximately rational
metalevel decision derived from bandit theory.
Metareasoning is more expensive than reﬂex action, of course, but compilation methods
can be applied so that the overhead is small compared to the costs of the computations being
controlled. Metalevel reinforcement learning may provide another way to acquire effective
policies for controlling deliberation: in essence, computations that lead to better decisions are
reinforced, while those that turn out to have no effect are penalized. This approach avoids the
myopia problems of the simple value-of-information calculation.
Metareasoning is one speciﬁc example of a reﬂective architecture—that is, an architec-
Reﬂective
architecture
ture that enables deliberation about the computational entities and actions occurring within
the architecture itself. A theoretical foundation for reﬂective architectures can be built by
deﬁning a joint state space composed from the environment state and the computational state
of the agent itself. Decision-making and learning algorithms can be designed that operate
over this joint state space and thereby serve to implement and improve the agent’s compu-
tational activities. Eventually, we expect task-speciﬁc algorithms such as alpha–beta search,
regression planning, and variable elimination to disappear from AI systems, to be replaced
by general methods that direct the agent’s computations toward the efﬁcient generation of
high-quality decisions.
Metareasoning and reﬂection (and many other efﬁciency-related architectural and algo-
rithmic devices explored in this book) are necessary because making decisions is hard. Ever
since computers were invented, their blinding speed has led people to overestimate their abil-
ity to overcome complexity, or, equivalently, to underestimate what complexity really means.


